--- PAGE 454 ---
hen you walk into a store, you are confronted with thousands of goods that 
you might buy. Because your financial resources are limited, however, you 
cannot buy everything that you want. You therefore consider the prices of 
the various goods offered for sale and buy a bundle of goods that, given your 
 resources, best suits your needs and desires.
In this chapter, we develop a theory that describes how consumers make deci-
sions about what to buy. Thus far in this book, we have summarized consumers’ 
decisions with the demand curve. As we have seen, the demand curve for a good 
--- PAGE 455 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
reflects consumers’ willingness to pay for that good. When the price rises, con-
sumers are willing to pay for fewer units, so the quantity demanded falls. We now 
look more deeply at the decisions that lie behind the demand curve. The theory of 
consumer choice presented in this chapter provides a more complete understand-
ing of demand, just as the theory of the competitive firm in Chapter 14 provides a 
more complete understanding of supply.
One of the Ten Principles of Economics discussed in Chapter 1 is that people face 
trade-offs. The theory of consumer choice examines the trade-offs that people face 
as consumers. When a consumer buys more of one good, she can afford less of 
other goods. When she spends more time enjoying leisure and less time work-
ing, she has lower income and therefore lower consumption. When she spends 
more of her income in the present and saves less of it, she reduces the amount she 
will be able to consume in the future. The theory of consumer choice examines 
how consumers facing these trade-offs make decisions and how they respond to 
changes in their environment.
After developing the basic theory of consumer choice, we apply it to three 
questions about household decisions. In particular, we ask:
• Do all demand curves slope downward?
• How do wages affect labor supply?
• How do interest rates affect household saving?
At first, these questions might seem unrelated. But as we will see, we can use the 
theory of consumer choice to address each of them. 
21-1 The Budget Constraint: What the Consumer Can Af
--- PAGE 456 ---
CHAPTER 21   THE THEORY OF CONSUMER CHOICE 
figure. At point A, the consumer buys no Pepsi and consumes 100 pizzas. At point 
B, the consumer buys no pizza and consumes 500 liters of Pepsi. At point C, the 
consumer buys 50 pizzas and 250 liters of Pepsi. Point C, which is exactly at the 
middle of the line from A to B, is the point at which the consumer spends an equal 
amount ($500) on pizza and Pepsi. These are only three of the many combinations 
of pizza and Pepsi that the consumer can choose. All the points on the line from A 
to B are possible. This line, called the budget constraint, shows the consumption 
bundles that the consumer can afford. In this case, it shows the trade-off between 
pizza and Pepsi that the consumer faces.
The slope of the budget constraint measures the rate at which the consumer can 
trade one good for the other. Recall that the slope between two points is  calculated 
as the change in the vertical distance divided by the change in the  horizontal dis-
tance (“rise over run”). From point A to point B, the vertical distance is 500  liters, 
and the horizontal distance is 100 pizzas. Thus, the slope is 5 liters per pizza. 
 (Actually, because the budget constraint slopes downward, the slope is a negative 
number. But for our purposes we can ignore the minus sign.)
Notice that the slope of the budget constraint equals the relative price of the two 
goods—the price of one good compared to the price of the other. A pizza costs five 
times as much as a liter of Pepsi, so the opportunity cost of a pizza is 5 liters of 
Pepsi. The budget constraint’s
--- PAGE 457 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
Our goal in this chapter is to understand how consumers make choices. The bud-
get constraint is one piece of the analysis: It shows the combinations of goods the 
consumer can afford given her income and the prices of the goods. The consum-
er’s choices, however, depend not only on her budget constraint but also on her 
preferences regarding the two goods. Therefore, the consumer’s preferences are 
the next piece of our analysis. 
21-2a Representing Preferences with Indifference Curves
The consumer’s preferences allow her to choose among different bundles of pizza 
and Pepsi. If you offer the consumer two different bundles, she chooses the bun-
dle that best suits her tastes. If the two bundles suit her tastes equally well, we say 
that the consumer is indifferent between the two bundles. 
Just as we have represented the consumer’s budget constraint graphically, 
we can also represent her preferences graphically. We do this with indifference 
curves. An indifference curve shows the various bundles of consumption that 
make the consumer equally happy. In this case, the indifference curves show the 
combinations of pizza and Pepsi with which the consumer is equally satisfied. 
Figure 2 shows two of the consumer’s many indifference curves. The consumer 
is indifferent among combinations A, B, and C because they are all on the same 
curve. Not surprisingly, if the consumer’s consumption of pizza is reduced, say, 
from point A to point B, consumption of Pepsi must increase to keep her equally 
happy. If consumption of pizza is reduced again, 
--- PAGE 458 ---
CHAPTER 21   THE THEORY OF CONSUMER CHOICE 
for Pepsi depends on whether she is hungrier or thirstier, which in turn depends 
on her current consumption of pizza and Pepsi.
The consumer is equally happy at all points on any given indifference curve, 
but she prefers some indifference curves to others. Because she prefers more 
consumption to less, higher indifference curves are preferred to lower ones. In 
Figure 2, any point on curve I2 is preferred to any point on curve I1.
A consumer’s set of indifference curves gives a complete ranking of the consum-
er’s preferences. That is, we can use the indifference curves to rank any two bundles 
of goods. For example, the indifference curves tell us that point D is preferred to 
point A because point D is on a higher indifference curve than point A. (That con-
clusion may be obvious, however, because point D offers the consumer both more 
pizza and more Pepsi.) The indifference curves also tell us that point D is preferred 
to point C because point D is on a higher indifference curve. Even though point D 
has less Pepsi than point C, it has more than enough extra pizza to make the con-
sumer prefer it. By seeing which point is on the higher indifference curve, we can 
use the set of indifference curves to rank any combination of pizza and Pepsi.
21-2b Four Properties of Indifference Curves
Because indifference curves represent a consumer’s preferences, they have certain 
properties that reflect those preferences. Here we consider four properties that 
describe most indifference curves:
Property 1: Higher indifference curves are p
--- PAGE 459 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
is on the same indifference curve as point B, the two points would make the 
consumer equally happy. In addition, because point B is on the same indif-
ference curve as point C, these two points would make the consumer equally 
happy. But these conclusions imply that points A and C would also make the 
consumer equally happy, even though point C has more of both goods. This 
contradicts our assumption that the consumer always prefers more of both 
goods to less. Thus, indifference curves cannot cross.
Property 4: Indifference curves are bowed inward. The slope of an indifference 
curve is the marginal rate of substitution—the rate at which the consumer 
is willing to trade off one good for the other. The marginal rate of substitu-
tion (MRS)  usually depends on the amount of each good the consumer is 
currently consuming. In particular, because people are more willing to trade 
away goods that they have in abundance and less willing to trade away 
goods of which they have little, the indifference curves are bowed inward 
toward the graph’s origin. As an example, consider Figure 4. At point A, 
because the consumer has a lot of Pepsi and only a little pizza, she is very 
hungry but not very thirsty. To induce the consumer to give up 1 pizza, she 
has to be given 6 liters of Pepsi: The MRS is 6 liters per pizza. By contrast, at 
point B, the consumer has little Pepsi and a lot of pizza, so she is very thirsty 
but not very hungry. At this point, she would be willing to give up 1 pizza 
to get 1 liter of Pepsi: The MRS is 1 liter per pizza. 
--- PAGE 460 ---
CHAPTER 21   THE THEORY OF CONSUMER CHOICE 
indifference curves are very bowed. To see why this is true, let’s consider the 
Perfect Substitutes  Suppose that someone offered you bundles of nickels and 
dimes. How would you rank the different bundles?
Most likely, you would care only about the total monetary value of each bun-
dle. If so, you would always be willing to trade 2 nickels for 1 dime. Your mar-
ginal rate of substitution between nickels and dimes would be a fixed number: 
MRS = 2, regardless of the number of nickels and dimes in the bundle. 
We can represent your preferences for nickels and dimes with the indifference 
curves in panel (a) of Figure 5. Because the marginal rate of substitution is con-
stant, the indifference curves are straight lines. In this extreme case of straight 
indifference curves, we say that the two goods are perfect substitutes.
Perfect Complements  Suppose now that someone offered you bundles of shoes. 
Some of the shoes fit your left foot, others your right foot. How would you rank 
In this case, you might care only about the number of pairs of shoes. In other 
words, you would judge a bundle based on the number of pairs you could 
assemble from it. A bundle of 5 left shoes and 7 right shoes yields only 5 pairs. 
Getting 1 more right shoe has no value if there is no left shoe to go with it. 
We can represent your preferences for right and left shoes with the indifference 
curves in panel (b) of Figure 5. In this case, a bundle with 5 left shoes and 5 right 
shoes is just as good as a bundle with 5 left shoes and 7 right shoes. It is a
--- PAGE 461 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
In the real world, of course, most goods are neither perfect substitutes (like 
nickels and dimes) nor perfect complements (like right shoes and left shoes). 
More typically, the indifference curves are bowed inward, but not so bowed that 
Draw some indifference curves for pizza and Pepsi. Explain the four prop-
erties of these indifference curves.
21-3 Optimization: What the Consumer Chooses
The goal of this chapter is to understand how a consumer makes choices. We have 
the two pieces necessary for this analysis: the consumer’s budget constraint (how 
much she can afford to spend) and the consumer’s preferences (what she wants to 
spend it on). Now we put these two pieces together and consider the consumer’s 
decision about what to buy. 
21-3a The Consumer’s Optimal Choices
Once again, consider our pizza and Pepsi example. The consumer would like to 
end up with the best possible combination of pizza and Pepsi for her—that is, the 
combination on her highest possible indifference curve. But the consumer must 
also end up on or below her budget constraint, which measures the total resources 
Figure 6 shows the consumer’s budget constraint and three of her many 
indifference curves. The highest indifference curve that the consumer can reach 
(I2 in the figure) is the one that just barely touches her budget constraint. The 
point at which this indifference curve and the budget constraint touch is called 
the optimum. The consumer would prefer point A, but she cannot afford that point 
because it lies above her budget constraint. The consum
--- PAGE 462 ---
CHAPTER 21   THE THEORY OF CONSUMER CHOICE 
Notice that, at the optimum, the slope of the indifference curve equals the slope 
of the budget constraint. We say that the indifference curve is tangent to the bud-
get constraint. The slope of the indifference curve is the marginal rate of substitu-
tion between pizza and Pepsi, and the slope of the budget constraint is the relative 
price of pizza and Pepsi. Thus, the consumer chooses consumption of the two goods so 
that the marginal rate of substitution equals the relative price.
In Chapter 7, we saw how market prices reflect the marginal value that con-
sumers place on goods. This analysis of consumer choice shows the same result in 
another way. In making her consumption choices, the consumer takes the relative 
price of the two goods as given and then chooses an optimum at which her mar-
ginal rate of substitution equals this relative price. The relative price is the rate 
at which the market is willing to trade one good for the other, whereas the mar-
ginal rate of substitution is the rate at which the consumer is willing to trade one 
good for the other. At the consumer’s optimum, the consumer’s valuation of the 
Utility: An Alternative Way to Describe Preferences 
e have used indifference curves to represent the consumer’s pref-
erences. Another common way to represent preferences is with the 
concept of utility. Utility is an abstract measure of the satisfaction or 
happiness that a consumer receives from a bundle of goods. Economists 
say that a consumer prefers one bundle of goods to another if one pro-
vides more u
--- PAGE 463 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
two goods (as measured by the marginal rate of substitution) equals the market’s 
valuation (as measured by the relative price). As a result of this consumer optimi-
zation, market prices of different goods reflect the value that consumers place on 
21-3b How Changes in Income Affect the Consumer’s Choices
Now that we have seen how the consumer makes a consumption decision, let’s 
examine how this decision responds to changes in the consumer’s income. To be 
specific, suppose that income increases. With higher income, the consumer can 
afford more of both goods. The increase in income, therefore, shifts the budget 
constraint outward, as in Figure 7. Because the relative price of the two goods has 
not changed, the slope of the new budget constraint is the same as the slope of the 
initial budget constraint. That is, an increase in income leads to a parallel shift in 
The expanded budget constraint allows the consumer to choose a better 
combination of pizza and Pepsi, one that is on a higher indifference curve. Given 
the shift in the budget constraint and the consumer’s preferences as represented 
by her indifference curves, the consumer’s optimum moves from the point labeled 
“initial optimum” to the point labeled “new optimum.”
Notice that, in Figure 7, the consumer chooses to consume more Pepsi and 
more pizza. The logic of the model does not require increased consumption 
of both goods in response to increased income, but this situation is the most 
common. As you may recall from Chapter 4, if a consumer wants more of a 
good when h
--- PAGE 464 ---
CHAPTER 21   THE THEORY OF CONSUMER CHOICE 
Figure 8 shows an example in which an increase in income induces the 
consumer to buy more pizza but less Pepsi. If a consumer buys less of a good 
when her income rises, economists call it an inferior good. Figure 8 is drawn 
under the assumption that pizza is a normal good and Pepsi is an inferior good. 
Although most goods in the world are normal goods, there are some inferior 
goods as well. An example is bus rides. As income increases, consumers are more 
likely to own cars or take taxis and less likely to ride the bus. Bus rides, therefore, 
21-3c How Changes in Prices Affect the Consumer’s Choices
Let’s now use this model of consumer choice to consider how a change in the 
price of one of the goods alters the consumer’s choices. Suppose, in particular, 
that the price of Pepsi falls from $2 to $1 per liter. It is no surprise that the lower 
price expands the consumer’s set of buying opportunities. In other words, a fall in 
the price of any good shifts the budget constraint outward.
Figure 9 considers more specifically how the fall in price affects the budget 
constraint. If the consumer spends her entire $1,000 income on pizza, then the 
price of Pepsi is irrelevant. Thus, point A in the figure stays the same. Yet if the 
consumer spends her entire income of $1,000 on Pepsi, she can now buy 1,000 
liters rather than only 500. Thus, the endpoint of the budget constraint moves 
Notice that in this case the outward shift in the budget constraint changes its 
slope. (This differs from what happened previously when prices staye
--- PAGE 465 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
How such a change in the budget constraint alters the consumption of both 
goods depends on the consumer’s preferences. For the indifference curves drawn 
in this figure, the consumer buys more Pepsi and less pizza.
21-3d Income and Substitution Effects
The impact of a change in the price of a good on consumption can be decomposed 
into two effects: an income effect and a substitution effect. To see what these two 
effects are, consider how our consumer might respond when she learns that the 
price of Pepsi has fallen. She might reason in the following ways:
• “Great news! Now that Pepsi is cheaper, my income has greater purchasing 
power. I am, in effect, richer than I was. Because I am richer, I can buy both 
more pizza and more Pepsi.” (This is the income effect.)
• “Now that the price of Pepsi has fallen, I get more liters of Pepsi for every 
pizza that I give up. Because pizza is now relatively more expensive, I should 
buy less pizza and more Pepsi.” (This is the substitution effect.) 
Which statement do you find more compelling?
In fact, both of these statements make sense. The decrease in the price of Pepsi 
makes the consumer better off. If pizza and Pepsi are both normal goods, the 
consumer will want to spread this improvement in her purchasing power over 
both goods. This income effect tends to make the consumer buy more pizza and 
more Pepsi. Yet at the same time, consumption of Pepsi has become less expensive 
relative to consumption of pizza. This substitution effect tends to make the 
consumer choose less pizza and more Pe
--- PAGE 466 ---
CHAPTER 21   THE THEORY OF CONSUMER CHOICE 
or less pizza is not clear. The outcome could go either way, depending on the sizes 
of the income and substitution effects. Table 1 summarizes these conclusions.
We can interpret the income and substitution effects using indifference curves. 
The income effect is the change in consumption that results from the movement to a new 
indifference curve. The substitution effect is the change in consumption that results from 
moving to a new point on the same indifference curve with a different marginal rate of 
Figure 10 shows graphically how to decompose the change in the consumer’s 
decision into the income effect and the substitution effect. When the price of Pepsi 
falls, the consumer moves from the initial optimum, point A, to the new optimum, 
point C. We can view this change as occurring in two steps. First, the consumer 
moves along the initial indifference curve, I1, from point A to point B. The consumer 
Income and Substitution Effects
The effect of a change in price can be broken 
down into an income effect and a substi-
tution effect. The substitution effect—the 
movement along an indifference curve to 
a point with a different marginal rate of 
substitution—is shown here as the change 
from point A to point B along indifference 
curve I1. The income effect—the shift to a 
higher indifference curve—is shown here 
as the change from point B on indifference 
curve I1 to point C on indifference curve I2. 
Effects When the Price of 
--- PAGE 467 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
is equally happy at these two points, but at point B, the marginal rate of substitution 
reflects the new relative price. (The dashed line through point B is parallel to the 
new budget constraint and thus reflects the new relative price.) Next, the consumer 
shifts to the higher indifference curve, I2, by moving from point B to point C. Even 
though point B and point C are on different indifference curves, they have the same 
marginal rate of substitution. That is, the slope of the indifference curve I1 at point B 
equals the slope of the indifference curve I2 at point C.
The consumer never actually chooses point B, but this hypothetical point is 
useful to clarify the two effects that determine the consumer’s decision. Notice that 
the change from point A to point B represents a pure change in the marginal rate of 
substitution without any change in the consumer’s welfare. Similarly, the change 
from point B to point C represents a pure change in welfare without any change 
in the marginal rate of substitution. Thus, the movement from A to B shows the 
substitution effect, and the movement from B to C shows the income effect. 
21-3e Deriving the Demand Curve
We have just seen how changes in the price of a good alter the consumer’s budget 
constraint and, therefore, the quantities of the two goods that she chooses to buy. 
The demand curve for any good reflects these consumption decisions. Recall that 
a demand curve shows the quantity demanded of a good for any given price. We 
can view a consumer’s demand curve as a summary of the opti
--- PAGE 468 ---
CHAPTER 21   THE THEORY OF CONSUMER CHOICE 
that results from this consumer’s decisions. In this way, the theory of consumer 
choice provides the theoretical foundation for the consumer’s demand curve.
It may be comforting to know that the demand curve arises naturally from the 
theory of consumer choice, but this exercise by itself does not justify developing 
the theory. There is no need for a rigorous, analytic framework just to establish 
that people respond to changes in prices. The theory of consumer choice is, 
however, useful in studying various decisions that people make as they go about 
their lives, as we see in the next section.
Draw a budget constraint and indifference curves for pizza and Pepsi. 
Show what happens to the budget constraint and the consumer’s optimum 
when the price of pizza rises. In your diagram, decompose the change into an income effect 
and a substitution effect.
Now that we have developed the basic theory of consumer choice, let’s use 
it to shed light on three questions about how the economy works. These three 
questions might at first seem unrelated. But because each question involves 
household decision making, we can address it with the model of consumer 
behavior we have just developed.
21-4a Do All Demand Curves Slope Downward?
Normally, when the price of a good rises, people buy less of it. This typical 
behavior, called the law of demand, is reflected in the downward slope of the 
As a matter of economic theory, however, demand curves can sometimes slope 
upward. In other words, consumers can sometimes violate the law of demand 
an
--- PAGE 469 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
Initially, the consumer’s budget constraint is the line from point A to point B. The 
optimum is point C. When the price of potatoes rises, the budget constraint shifts 
inward and is now the line from point A to point D. The optimum is now point E. 
Notice that a rise in the price of potatoes has led the consumer to buy a larger 
Why is the consumer responding in this strange way? In this example, potatoes 
are a strongly inferior good; that is, potatoes are a good that a person buys 
a lot less of when her income rises and a lot more of when her income falls. In 
Figure 12, the increase in the price of potatoes makes the consumer poorer; that 
is, the higher price puts her on a lower indifference curve. Because she is poorer 
and potatoes are an inferior good, the income effect makes her want to buy less 
meat and more potatoes. At the same time, because the potatoes have become 
more expensive relative to meat, the substitution effect makes the consumer want 
to buy more meat and fewer potatoes. If the income effect is much larger than the 
substitution effect, as it is in this example, the consumer responds to the higher 
price of potatoes by buying less meat and more potatoes.
Economists use the term Giffen good to describe a good that violates the law 
of demand. (The term is named for economist Robert Giffen, who first noted this 
possibility.) In this example, potatoes are a Giffen good. Giffen goods are inferior 
goods for which the income effect dominates the substitution effect. Therefore, 
they have demand curves that slope up
--- PAGE 470 ---
CHAPTER 21   THE THEORY OF CONSUMER CHOICE 
some of it working so they can afford to buy consumption goods. The essence of 
the time-allocation problem is the trade-off between leisure and consumption.
Consider the decision facing Kayla, a freelance software designer. Kayla is 
awake for 100 hours per week. She spends some of this time enjoying leisure—
playing Minecraft, watching The Bachelor on television, and reading this textbook. 
She spends the rest of this time at her computer developing software. For 
every hour she works developing software, she earns $50, which she spends on 
consumption goods—food, clothing, and music downloads. Her hourly wage 
of $50 reflects the trade-off Kayla faces between leisure and consumption. For 
every hour of leisure she gives up, she works one more hour and gets $50 of 
Figure 13 shows Kayla’s budget constraint. If she spends all 100 hours enjoying 
leisure, she has no consumption. If she spends all 100 hours working, she earns a 
weekly consumption of $5,000 but has no time for leisure. If she works a 40-hour 
week, she enjoys 60 hours of leisure and has weekly consumption of $2,000.
Figure 13 uses indifference curves to represent Kayla’s preferences for 
consumption and leisure. Here consumption and leisure are the two “goods” 
between which Kayla is choosing. Because Kayla always prefers more leisure 
and more consumption, she prefers points on higher indifference curves to 
points on lower ones. At a wage of $50 per hour, Kayla chooses a combination of 
consumption and leisure represented by the point labeled “optimum.” This is t
--- PAGE 471 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
wage is different in the two cases. In panel (a), Kayla responds to the higher wage 
by enjoying less leisure. In panel (b), Kayla responds by enjoying more leisure.
Kayla’s decision between leisure and consumption determines her supply of 
labor because the more leisure she enjoys, the less time she has left to work. In 
each panel of Figure 14, the right graph shows the labor-supply curve implied by 
Kayla’s decision. In panel (a), a higher wage induces Kayla to enjoy less leisure 
(a) For a person with these preferences . . .
. . . the labor supply curve slopes upward.
(b) For a person with these preferences . . .
. . . the labor supply curve slopes backward.
1. When the wage rises . . .
2. . . . hours of leisure increase . . .
3. . . . and hours of labor decrease.
2. . . . hours of leisure decrease . . .
3. . . . and hours of labor increase.
1. When the wage rises . . .
The two panels of this figure show how a person might respond to an increase in the wage. 
The graphs on the left show the consumer’s initial budget constraint, BC1, and new budget 
constraint, BC2, as well as the consumer’s optimal choices over consumption and leisure. The 
graphs on the right show the resulting labor-supply curve. Because hours worked equal total 
hours available minus hours of leisure, any change in leisure implies an opposite change in the 
quantity of labor supplied. In panel (a), when the wage rises, consumption rises and leisure 
falls, resulting in a labor-supply curve that slopes upward. In panel (b), when the wage rises, 
both consumption and
--- PAGE 472 ---
CHAPTER 21   THE THEORY OF CONSUMER CHOICE 
and work more, so the labor-supply curve slopes upward. In panel (b), a higher 
wage induces Kayla to enjoy more leisure and work less, so the labor-supply 
At first, the backward-sloping labor-supply curve is puzzling. Why would 
a person respond to a higher wage by working less? The answer comes from 
considering the income and substitution effects of a higher wage.
Consider first the substitution effect. When Kayla’s wage rises, leisure becomes 
more expensive relative to consumption, and this encourages Kayla to substitute 
away from leisure and toward consumption. In other words, the substitution 
effect induces Kayla to work more in response to higher wages, which tends to 
make the labor-supply curve slope upward.
Now consider the income effect. When Kayla’s wage rises, she moves to 
a higher indifference curve. She is now better off than she was. As long as 
consumption and leisure are both normal goods, she tends to want to use this 
increase in well-being to enjoy both higher consumption and greater leisure. In 
other words, the income effect induces her to work less, which tends to make the 
labor-supply curve slope backward. 
In the end, economic theory does not give a clear prediction about whether an 
increase in the wage induces Kayla to work more or less. If the substitution effect 
is greater than the income effect, she works more. If the income effect is greater 
than the substitution effect, she works less. The labor-supply curve, therefore, 
could be either upward- or backward-sloping.
 IN COME EFFECTS ON LABOR
--- PAGE 473 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
Similar results were found in a 1993 study, published in the Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, of how receiving a bequest affects a person’s labor supply. The study 
found that a single person who inherits more than $150,000 is four times as likely 
to stop working as a single person who inherits less than $25,000. This finding 
would not have surprised the 19th-century industrialist Andrew Carnegie. 
Carnegie warned that “the parent who leaves his son enormous wealth generally 
deadens the talents and energies of the son, and tempts him to lead a less 
useful and less worthy life than he otherwise would.” That is, Carnegie viewed 
the income effect on labor supply to be substantial and, from his paternalistic 
perspective, regrettable. During his life and at his death, Carnegie gave much of 
his vast fortune to charity. ●
21-4c How Do Interest Rates Affect Household Saving?
An important decision that every person faces is how much income to consume 
today and how much to save for the future. We can use the theory of consumer 
choice to analyze how people make this decision and how the amount they save 
depends on the interest rate their savings will earn.
Consider the decision facing Saul, a worker planning for retirement. To keep 
things simple, let’s divide Saul’s life into two periods. In the first period, Saul is 
young and working. In the second period, he is old and retired. When young, Saul 
earns $100,000. He divides this income between current consumption and saving. 
When he is old, Saul will consume what he has saved, including
--- PAGE 474 ---
CHAPTER 21   THE THEORY OF CONSUMER CHOICE 
Figure 15 uses indifference curves to represent Saul’s preferences for 
consumption in the two periods. Because Saul prefers more consumption in both 
periods, he prefers points on higher indifference curves to points on lower ones. 
Given his preferences, Saul chooses the optimal combination of consumption in 
both periods of life, which is the point on the budget constraint that is on the 
highest possible indifference curve. At this optimum, Saul consumes $50,000 
when young and $55,000 when old.
Now consider what happens when the interest rate increases from 10 to 
20 percent. Figure 16 shows two possible outcomes. In both cases, the budget 
constraint shifts outward and becomes steeper. At the new, higher interest rate, 
Saul gets more consumption when old for every dollar of consumption that he 
The two panels show the results given different preferences by Saul. In both 
cases, consumption when old rises. Yet the response of consumption when young 
to the change in the interest rate is different in the two cases. In panel (a), Saul 
responds to the higher interest rate by consuming less when young. In panel (b), 
Saul responds by consuming more when young. 
Saul’s saving is his income when young minus the amount he consumes when 
young. In panel (a), an increase in the interest rate reduces consumption when 
young, so saving must rise. In panel (b), an increase in the interest rate induces 
Saul to consume more when young, so saving must fall. 
The case shown in panel (b) might at first seem odd: Saul responds to an 
increa
--- PAGE 475 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
Consider first the substitution effect. When the interest rate rises, consumption 
when old becomes less costly relative to consumption when young. Therefore, the 
substitution effect induces Saul to consume more when old and less when young. 
In other words, the substitution effect induces Saul to save more. 
Now consider the income effect. When the interest rate rises, Saul moves 
to a higher indifference curve. He is now better off than he was. As long as 
consumption in both periods consists of normal goods, he tends to want to use 
this increase in well-being to enjoy higher consumption in both periods. In other 
words, the income effect induces him to save less. 
The result depends on both the income and substitution effects. If the 
substitution effect of a higher interest rate is greater than the income effect, Saul 
saves more. If the income effect is greater than the substitution effect, Saul saves 
less. Thus, the theory of consumer choice says that an increase in the interest rate 
could either encourage or discourage saving.
This ambiguous result is interesting from the standpoint of economic theory, 
but it is disappointing from the standpoint of economic policy. It turns out that an 
important issue in tax policy hinges in part on how saving responds to interest rates. 
Some economists have advocated reducing the taxation of interest and other capital 
income, arguing that such a policy change would raise the after-tax interest rate 
that savers can earn and thereby encourage people to save more. Other economists 
have argu
--- PAGE 476 ---
CHAPTER 21   THE THEORY OF CONSUMER CHOICE 
Just as the proof of the pudding is in the eating, the test of a theory is in its 
applications. In the last section of this chapter, we applied the theory of consumer 
choice to three practical issues about the economy. If you take more advanced 
courses in economics, you will see that this theory provides the framework for 
1. Emilio buys pizza for $10 and soda for $2. He 
has income of $100. His budget constraint will 
experience a parallel outward shift if which of the 
a. The price of pizza falls to $5, the price of soda 
falls to $1, and his income falls to $50.
b. The price of pizza rises to $20, the price of soda 
rises to $4, and his income remains the same.
c. The price of pizza falls to $8, the price of soda 
falls to $1, and his income rises to $120.
d. The price of pizza rises to $20, the price of soda 
rises to $4, and his income rises to $400.
2. At any point on an indifference curve, the slope of the 
curve measures the consumer’s
b. willingness to trade one good for the other.
c. perception of the two goods as substitutes or 
3. Matthew and Susan are both optimizing consumers in 
the markets for shirts and hats, where they pay $100 
for a shirt and $50 for a hat. Matthew buys 4 shirts 
and 16 hats, while Susan buys 6 shirts and 12 hats. 
From this information, we can infer that Matthew’s 
marginal rate of substitution is _____ hats per shirt, 
4. Darius buys only lobster and chicken. Lobster is a 
normal good, while chicken is an inferior good. When 
the price of lobster rises, Darius buys
b. more lobster and less
--- PAGE 477 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
• When the price of a good falls, the impact on the 
consumer’s choices can be broken down into an income 
effect and a substitution effect. The income effect is the 
change in consumption that arises because a lower 
price makes the consumer better off. The substitution 
effect is the change in consumption that arises because 
a price change encourages greater consumption of the 
good that has become relatively cheaper. The income 
effect is reflected in the movement from a lower to a 
higher indifference curve, whereas the substitution 
effect is reflected by a movement along an indifference 
curve to a point with a different slope.
• The theory of consumer choice can be applied in 
many situations. It explains why demand curves can 
potentially slope upward, why higher wages could 
either increase or decrease the quantity of labor 
supplied, and why higher interest rates could either 
increase or decrease saving.
indifference curve, p. 428
marginal rate of substitution, p. 428
perfect substitutes, p. 431
perfect complements, p. 431
substitution effect, p. 436
1. A consumer has income of $3,000. Wine costs  
$3 per glass, and cheese costs $6 per pound. Draw the 
consumer’s budget constraint with wine on the vertical 
axis. What is the slope of this budget constraint?
2. Draw a consumer’s indifference curves for wine and 
cheese. Describe and explain four properties of these 
3. Pick a point on an indifference curve for wine and 
cheese, and show the marginal rate of substitution. 
What does the marginal rate of substitution tell us?
4. 
--- PAGE 478 ---
CHAPTER 21   THE THEORY OF CONSUMER CHOICE 
3. You consume only soda and pizza. One day, the price 
of soda goes up, the price of pizza goes down, and 
you are just as happy as you were before the price 
a. Illustrate this situation on a graph.
b. How does your consumption of the two goods 
change? How does your response depend on 
income and substitution effects?
c. Can you afford the bundle of soda and pizza you 
consumed before the price changes?
4. Carlos consumes only cheese and crackers.
a. Could cheese and crackers both be inferior goods 
b. Suppose that cheese is a normal good for Carlos 
while crackers are an inferior good. If the 
price of cheese falls, what happens to Carlos’s 
consumption of crackers? What happens to his 
consumption of cheese? Explain.
5. Jacob buys only milk and cookies.
a. In year 1, Jacob earns $100, milk costs $2 per 
quart, and cookies cost $4 per dozen. Draw 
Jacob’s budget constraint.
b. Now suppose that all prices increase by 
10 percent in year 2 and that Jacob’s salary 
increases by 10 percent as well. Draw Jacob’s 
new budget constraint. How would Jacob’s 
optimal combination of milk and cookies in year 2 
compare to his optimal combination in year 1?
6. State whether each of the following statements is true 
or false. Explain your answers. 
a. “All Giffen goods are inferior goods.”
b. “All inferior goods are Giffen goods.”
7. A college student has two options for meals: eating at 
the dining hall for $6 per meal, or eating a Cup O’ Soup 
for $1.50 per meal. Her weekly food budget is $60.
a. Draw the budget constraint showing the 
tr
--- PAGE 479 ---

--- PAGE 480 ---
conomics is a study of the choices that people make and the resulting interac-
tions they have with one another. As the preceding chapters demonstrate, the 
field has many facets. Yet it would be a mistake to think that all the facets we 
have seen make up a finished jewel, perfect and unchanging. Like all scientists, 
economists are always looking for new areas to study and new phenomena to 
explain. This final chapter on microeconomics offers an assortment of three top-
ics at the discipline’s frontier to show how economists are trying to expand their 
 understanding of human behavior and society. 
The first topic is the economics of asymmetric information. In many  different 
situations, some people are better informed than others, and 
the imbalance in information affects the choices they 
make and how they deal with one another. 
Frontiers of Microeconomics
