--- PAGE 480 ---
conomics is a study of the choices that people make and the resulting interac-
tions they have with one another. As the preceding chapters demonstrate, the 
field has many facets. Yet it would be a mistake to think that all the facets we 
have seen make up a finished jewel, perfect and unchanging. Like all scientists, 
economists are always looking for new areas to study and new phenomena to 
explain. This final chapter on microeconomics offers an assortment of three top-
ics at the discipline’s frontier to show how economists are trying to expand their 
 understanding of human behavior and society. 
The first topic is the economics of asymmetric information. In many  different 
situations, some people are better informed than others, and 
the imbalance in information affects the choices they 
make and how they deal with one another. 
Frontiers of Microeconomics
--- PAGE 481 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
Thinking about this asymmetry can shed light on many aspects of the world, from 
the market for used cars to the custom of gift giving.
The second topic we examine in this chapter is political economy. Throughout 
this book, we have seen many examples in which markets fail and government 
policy can potentially improve matters. But “potentially” is a necessary qualifier: 
Whether this potential is realized depends on how well our political institutions 
work. The field of political economy uses the tools of economics to understand 
the functioning of government.
The third topic in this chapter is behavioral economics. This field brings some 
insights from psychology into the study of economic issues. It offers a view of 
 human behavior that is more subtle and complex than the one found in conven-
tional economic theory, a view that may be more realistic.
This chapter covers a lot of ground. To do so, it offers not full helpings of these 
three topics but, instead, a taste of each. One goal of this chapter is to show a few of 
the directions economists are heading in their effort to expand knowledge of how 
the economy works. Another is to whet your appetite for more courses in economics.
22-1 Asymmetric Information 
“I know something you don’t know.” This statement is a common taunt among 
children, but it also conveys a deep truth about how people sometimes interact 
with one another. Many times in life, one person knows more about what is going 
on than another. A difference in access to knowledge that is relevant to an interac-
tion i
--- PAGE 482 ---
CHAPTER 22   FRONTIERS OF MICROECONOMICS
High wages. According to efficiency-wage theories (discussed in Chapter 19), 
some employers may choose to pay their workers a wage above the level 
that balances supply and demand in the labor market. A worker who earns 
an above-equilibrium wage is less likely to shirk because if he is caught and 
fired, he might not be able to find another high-paying job.
Delayed payment. Firms can delay part of a worker’s compensation, so if 
the worker is caught shirking and is fired, he suffers a larger penalty. One 
example of delayed compensation is the year-end bonus. Similarly, a firm 
may choose to pay its workers more later in their lives. Thus, the wage 
increases that workers get as they age may reflect not just the benefits of  
experience but also a response to moral hazard.
Employers can use any combination of these various mechanisms to reduce the 
uch production in the modern economy takes place within corpo-
rations. Like other firms, corporations buy inputs in markets for 
the factors of production and sell their output in markets for goods and 
services. Also like other firms, they are guided in their decisions by the 
objective of profit maximization. But a large corporation has to deal with 
some issues that do not arise in, say, a small family-owned business.
What is distinctive about a corporation? From a legal standpoint, a 
corporation is an organization that is granted a charter recognizing it as 
a separate legal entity, with its own rights and responsibilities distinct 
from those of its owners and employees. From an e
--- PAGE 483 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
There are also many examples of moral hazard beyond the workplace. A home-
owner with fire insurance will likely buy too few fire extinguishers because the home-
owner bears the cost of the extinguisher while the insurance company receives much 
of the benefit. A family may live near a river with a high risk of flooding because the 
family enjoys the scenic views, while the government bears the cost of disaster relief 
after a flood. Many regulations are aimed at addressing the problem: An insurance 
company may require homeowners to buy fire extinguishers, and the government 
may prohibit building homes on land with high risk of flooding. But the insurance 
company does not have perfect information about how cautious homeowners are, and 
the government does not have perfect information about the risk that families under-
take when choosing where to live. As a result, the problem of moral hazard persists.
22-1b  Hidden Characteristics: Adverse Selection and  
Adverse selection is a problem that arises in markets in which the seller knows 
more about the attributes of the good being sold than the buyer does. In such 
a situation, the buyer runs the risk of being sold a good of low quality. That is, 
the “selection” of goods sold may be “adverse” from the standpoint of the unin-
The classic example of adverse selection is the market for used cars. Sellers of 
used cars know their vehicles’ defects while buyers often do not. Because owners 
of the worst cars are more likely to sell them than are the owners of the best cars, 
buyers are worri
--- PAGE 484 ---
CHAPTER 22   FRONTIERS OF MICROECONOMICS
22-1c Signaling to Convey Private Information
Although asymmetric information is sometimes a motivation for public policy, it 
also motivates some individual behavior that otherwise might be hard to explain. 
Markets respond to problems of asymmetric information in many ways. One of 
them is signaling, which refers to actions taken by an informed party for the sole 
purpose of credibly revealing his private information. 
We have seen examples of signaling in previous chapters. As we saw in 
 Chapter 16, firms may spend money on advertising to signal to potential cus-
tomers that they have high-quality products. As we saw in Chapter 19, students 
may earn college degrees merely to signal to potential employers that they are 
high-ability individuals, rather than to increase their productivity. These two 
 examples of signaling (advertising, education) may seem very different, but 
below the surface, they are much the same: In both cases, the informed party (the 
firm, the student) uses the signal to convince the uninformed party (the customer, 
the employer) that the informed party is offering something of high quality.
What does it take for an action to be an effective signal? Obviously, it must be 
costly. If a signal were free, everyone would use it and it would convey no infor-
mation. For the same reason, there is another requirement: The signal must be less 
costly, or more beneficial, to the person with the higher-quality product. Other-
wise, everyone would have the same incentive to use the signal, and the signal 
Consider ag
--- PAGE 485 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
One interpretation of gift giving is that it reflects asymmetric information and 
signaling. The man in our story has private information that the girlfriend would 
like to know: Does he really love her? Choosing a good gift for her is a signal of 
his love. Certainly, the act of picking out a gift, rather than giving cash, has the 
right characteristics to be a signal. It is costly (it takes time), and its cost depends 
on private information (how much he loves her). If he really loves her, choosing a 
good gift is easy because he is thinking about her all the time. If he doesn’t love her, 
finding the right gift is more difficult. Thus, giving a gift that suits his girlfriend is 
one way for him to convey the private information of his love for her. Giving cash 
shows that he isn’t even bothering to try.
The signaling theory of gift giving is consistent with another observation: Peo-
ple care most about the custom when the strength of affection is most in question. 
Thus, giving cash to a girlfriend or boyfriend is usually a bad move. But when col-
lege students receive a check from their parents, they are less often offended. The 
parents’ love is less likely to be in doubt, so the recipient probably won’t interpret 
the cash gift as a signal of insufficient affection. ●
22-1d Screening to Uncover Private Information
When an informed party takes actions to reveal private information, the phenom-
enon is called signaling. When an uninformed party takes actions to induce the 
 informed party to reveal private information, the phenomenon 
--- PAGE 486 ---
CHAPTER 22   FRONTIERS OF MICROECONOMICS
The tension between market success and market failure is central in microeco-
nomics. We learned in Chapter 7 that the equilibrium of supply and demand is 
efficient in the sense that it maximizes the total surplus that society can obtain 
in a market. Adam Smith’s invisible hand seemed to reign supreme. This con-
clusion was then tempered with the study of externalities (Chapter 10), public 
goods (Chapter 11), imperfect competition (Chapters 15 through 17), and poverty 
(Chapter 20). In those chapters, we saw that government can sometimes improve 
The study of asymmetric information gives us a new reason to be wary of 
markets. When some people know more than others, the market may fail to put 
resources to their best use. People with high-quality used cars may have trou-
ble selling them because buyers will be afraid of getting a lemon. People with 
few health problems may have trouble getting low-cost health insurance because 
insurance companies lump them together with those who have significant (but 
Asymmetric information may call for government action in some cases, but 
three facts complicate the issue. First, as we have seen, the private market can 
sometimes deal with information asymmetries on its own using a combination 
of signaling and screening. Second, the government rarely has more information 
than the private parties. Even if the market’s allocation of resources is not ideal, it 
may be the best that can be achieved. That is, when there are information asym-
metries, policymakers may find it hard to improve upon t
--- PAGE 487 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
For example, suppose there are three possible outcomes, labeled A, B, and C, 
and there are three voter types with the preferences shown in Table 1. The mayor 
of our town wants to aggregate these individual preferences into preferences for 
society as a whole. How should he do it?
At first, he might try some pairwise votes. If he asks voters to choose first 
between B and C, voter types 1 and 2 will vote for B, giving B the majority. If he 
then asks voters to choose between A and B, voter types 1 and 3 will vote for A, 
giving A the majority. Observing that A beats B, and B beats C, the mayor might 
conclude that A is the voters’ clear choice.
But wait: Suppose the mayor then asks voters to choose between A and C. In 
this case, voter types 2 and 3 vote for C, giving C the majority. That is, under pair-
wise majority voting, A beats B, B beats C, and C beats A. Normally, we expect 
preferences to exhibit a property called transitivity: If A is preferred to B, and B 
is preferred to C, then we would expect A to be preferred to C. The Condorcet 
paradox is that democratic outcomes do not always obey this property. Pairwise 
voting might produce transitive preferences for society in some cases, but as our 
example in the table shows, it cannot be counted on to do so.
One implication of the Condorcet paradox is that the order in which things are 
voted on can affect the result. If the mayor suggests choosing first between A and 
B and then comparing the winner to C, the town ends up choosing C. But if the 
voters choose first between B and 
--- PAGE 488 ---
CHAPTER 22   FRONTIERS OF MICROECONOMICS
theorist, Jean-Charles de Borda, who devised it. It is often used in polls that rank 
Is there a perfect voting system? Economist Kenneth Arrow took up this ques-
tion in his 1951 book Social Choice and Individual Values. Arrow started by defining 
what a perfect voting system would be. He assumes that individuals in society 
have preferences over the various possible outcomes: A, B, C, and so on. He then 
assumes that society wants a voting system to choose among these outcomes that 
satisfies several properties:
• Unanimity: If everyone prefers A to B, then A should beat B.
• Transitivity: If A beats B, and B beats C, then A should beat C.
• Independence of irrelevant alternatives: The ranking between any two out-
comes A and B should not depend on whether some third outcome C is also 
• No dictators: There is no person who always gets his way, regardless of every-
These all seem like desirable properties of a voting system. Yet Arrow proved, 
mathematically and incontrovertibly, that no voting system can satisfy all these prop-
erties. This amazing result is called Arrow’s impossibility theorem.
The mathematics needed to prove Arrow’s theorem is beyond the scope of this 
book, but we can get some sense of why the theorem is true from a couple of 
examples. We have already seen the problem with the method of majority rule. 
The Condorcet paradox shows that majority rule fails to produce a ranking of out-
comes that always satisfies transitivity. 
As another example, the Borda count fails to satisfy the independence of irrel-
evant 
--- PAGE 489 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
billion. Given these preferences, what outcome would you expect democracy to 
According to a famous result called the median voter theorem, majority rule 
will produce the outcome most preferred by the median voter. The median voter is 
the voter exactly in the middle of the distribution. In this example, if you take the 
line of voters ordered by their preferred budgets and count 50 voters from either 
end of the line, you will find that the median voter wants a budget of $10 billion. 
By contrast, the average preferred outcome (calculated by adding the preferred 
outcomes and dividing by the number of voters) is $9 billion, and the modal out-
come (the one preferred by the greatest number of voters) is $15 billion.
The median voter rules the day because his preferred outcome beats any other 
proposal in a two-way race. In our example, more than half the voters want $10 
billion or more, and more than half want $10 billion or less. If someone proposes, 
say, $8 billion instead of $10 billion, everyone who prefers $10 billion or more 
will vote with the median voter. Similarly, if someone proposes $12 billion instead 
of $10 billion, everyone who wants $10 billion or less will vote with the median 
voter. In either case, the median voter has more than half the voters on his side.
What about the Condorcet voting paradox? It turns out that when the voters 
are picking a point along a line and each voter aims for his own most preferred 
point, the Condorcet paradox cannot arise. The median voter’s most preferred 
outcome beats all challenger
--- PAGE 490 ---
CHAPTER 22   FRONTIERS OF MICROECONOMICS
If the Democrats want to win, they will move their platform toward the median 
voter. Thus, this theory can explain why the parties in a two-party system are sim-
ilar to each other: They are both moving toward the median voter.
Another implication of the median voter theorem is that minority views are 
not given much weight. Imagine that 40 percent of the population want a lot of 
money spent on the national parks and 60 percent want nothing spent. In this 
case, the median voter’s preference is zero, regardless of the intensity of the mi-
nority’s view. Rather than reaching a compromise that takes everyone’s prefer-
ences into account, majority rule looks only to the person in the exact middle of 
the distribution. Such is the logic of democracy.
22-2d Politicians Are People Too
When economists study consumer behavior, they assume that consumers buy the 
bundle of goods and services that gives them the greatest level of satisfaction. 
When economists study firm behavior, they assume that firms produce the quan-
tity of goods and services that yields the greatest level of profits. What should 
they assume when they study people involved in the practice of politics?
Politicians also have objectives. It would be nice to assume that political lead-
ers are always looking out for the well-being of society as a whole, that they are 
aiming for an optimal combination of efficiency and equality. Nice, perhaps, but 
not realistic. Self-interest is as powerful a motive for political actors as it is for 
consumers and firm owners. Some politi
--- PAGE 491 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
22-3a People Aren’t Always Rational
Economic theory is populated by a particular species of organism, sometimes called 
Homo economicus. Members of this species are always rational. As firm owners, they 
maximize profits. As consumers, they maximize utility (or equivalently, pick the point 
on the highest indifference curve). Given the constraints they face, they rationally 
weigh all the costs and benefits and always choose the best possible course of action.
Real people, however, are Homo sapiens. Although in many ways they resemble 
the rational, calculating people assumed in economic theory, they are far more 
complex. They can be forgetful, impulsive, confused, emotional, and shortsighted. 
These imperfections of human reasoning are the bread and butter of psycholo-
gists, but until recently, economists have neglected them.
Herbert Simon, one of the first social scientists to work at the boundary of eco-
nomics and psychology, suggested that humans should be viewed not as ratio-
nal maximizers but as satisficers. Instead of always choosing the best course of 
action, they make decisions that are merely good enough. Similarly, other econ-
omists have suggested that humans are only “near rational” or that they exhibit 
Studies of human decision making have tried to detect systematic mistakes 
that people make. Here are a few of the findings:
• People are overconfident. Imagine that you were asked some numerical ques-
tions, such as the number of African countries in the United Nations, the 
height of the tallest mountain in North Ameri
--- PAGE 492 ---
CHAPTER 22   FRONTIERS OF MICROECONOMICS
offer their workers. In some firms, workers can choose to participate in the plan 
by filling out a simple form. In other firms, workers are automatically enrolled 
and can opt out of the plan by filling out a simple form. It turns out many more 
workers participate in the second case than in the first. If workers were perfectly 
rational maximizers, they would choose the optimal amount of retirement sav-
ing, regardless of the default offered by their employer. In fact, workers’ behavior 
appears to exhibit substantial inertia. Understanding their behavior seems easier 
once we abandon the model of rational man.
Why, you might ask, is economics built on the rationality assumption when 
psychology and common sense cast doubt on it? One answer is that the assump-
tion, even if not exactly true, may be true enough that it yields reasonably accu-
rate models of behavior. For example, when we studied the differences between 
competitive and monopoly firms, the assumption that firms rationally maximize 
profit yielded many important and valid insights. Incorporating complex psycho-
logical deviations from rationality into the story might have added realism, but 
it also would have muddied the waters and made those insights harder to find. 
Recall from Chapter 2 that economic models are not meant to replicate reality but 
are supposed to show the essence of the problem at hand.
Another reason economists often assume rationality may be that economists 
are themselves not rational maximizers. Like most people, they are overconfident 
and rel
--- PAGE 493 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
to propose giving player B an amount such as $30 or $40, keeping the larger share 
for himself. In this case, player B usually accepts the proposal.
What’s going on here? The natural interpretation is that people are driven in part 
by some innate sense of fairness. A 99–1 split seems so wildly unfair to many people 
that they reject it, even to their own detriment. By contrast, a 70–30 split is still unfair, 
but it is not so unfair that it induces people to abandon their normal self-interest.
Throughout our study of household and firm behavior, the innate sense of fair-
ness has not played any role. But the results of the ultimatum game suggest that 
A leading behavioral economist makes 
The Importance of Irrelevance
arly in my teaching career I managed to get 
most of the students in my class mad at me. 
A midterm exam caused the problem.
I wanted the exam to sort out the stars, 
the average Joes and the duds, so it had to be 
hard and have a wide dispersion of scores. I 
succeeded in writing such an exam, but when 
the students got their results they were in an 
uproar. Their principal complaint was that the 
average score was only 72 points out of 100.
What was odd about this reaction was that I 
had already explained that the average numer-
ical score on the exam had absolutely no effect 
on the distribution of letter grades. We employed 
a curve in which the average grade was a B+, 
and only a tiny number of students received 
grades below a C. I told the class this, but it 
had no effect on the students’ mood. They still 
hated my
--- PAGE 494 ---
CHAPTER 22   FRONTIERS OF MICROECONOMICS
perhaps it should. For example, in Chapters 18 and 19, we discussed how wages 
were determined by labor supply and labor demand. Some economists have sug-
gested that the perceived fairness of what a firm pays its workers should also 
enter the picture. Thus, when a firm has an especially profitable year, workers 
(like player B) may expect to be paid a fair share of the prize, even if the standard 
equilibrium does not dictate it. The firm (like player A) might well decide to give 
workers more than the equilibrium wage for fear that the workers might other-
wise try to punish the firm with reduced effort, strikes, or even vandalism.
markets. To defenders of economics orthodoxy, mar-
kets are thought to have magic powers.
There is a version of this magic market argu-
ment that I call the invisible hand wave. It goes 
something like this. “Yes, it is true that my spouse 
and my students and members of Congress don’t 
understand anything about economics, but when 
they have to interact with markets . . . .” It is at 
this point that the hand waving comes in. Words 
and phrases such as high stakes, learning and 
arbitrage are thrown around to suggest some of 
the ways that markets can do their magic, but it 
is my claim that no one has ever finished making 
the argument with both hands remaining still.
Hand waving is required because there is 
nothing in the workings of markets that turns 
otherwise normal human beings into Econs. For 
example, if you choose the wrong career, select 
the wrong mortgage or fail to save for retire-
ment,
--- PAGE 495 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
22-3c People Are Inconsistent over Time
Imagine some dreary task, such as doing your laundry, shoveling snow off your 
driveway, or filling out your income tax forms. Now consider the following 
 1. Would you prefer (A) to spend 50 minutes doing the task right now or (B) to 
spend 60 minutes doing the task tomorrow?
 2. Would you prefer (A) to spend 50 minutes doing the task in 90 days or (B) to 
spend 60 minutes doing the task in 91 days?
When asked questions like these, many people choose B for question 1 and A for 
question 2. When looking ahead to the future (as in question 2), they minimize the 
amount of time spent on the dreary task. But faced with the prospect of doing the 
task immediately (as in question 1), they choose to put it off.
In some ways, this behavior is not surprising: Everyone procrastinates from 
time to time. But from the standpoint of the theory of rational man, it is puzzling. 
Suppose that in response to question 2, a person chooses to spend 50 minutes in 
90 days. Then, when the 90th day arrives, we allow him to change his mind. In 
effect, he then faces question 1, so he opts for doing the task the next day. But why 
should the mere passage of time affect the choices he makes?
Many times in life, people make plans for themselves, but then they fail to 
follow through. A smoker promises himself that he will quit, but within a few 
hours of smoking his last cigarette, he craves another and breaks his promise. 
A person trying to lose weight promises that he will stop eating dessert, but 
when the waiter brings 
--- PAGE 496 ---
CHAPTER 22   FRONTIERS OF MICROECONOMICS
1. Because Elaine has a family history of significant 
medical problems, she buys health insurance, 
whereas her friend Jerry, who has a healthier family, 
goes without. This is an example of
2. George has a life insurance policy that pays his family 
$1 million if he dies. As a result, he does not hesitate 
to enjoy his favorite hobby of bungee jumping. This is 
3. Before selling anyone a health insurance policy, the 
Kramer Insurance Company requires that applicants 
undergo a medical examination. Those with signifi-
cant preexisting medical problems are charged more. 
4. The Condorcet paradox illustrates Arrow’s impossibil-
ity theorem by showing that pairwise majority voting
a. is inconsistent with the principle of unanimity.
b. leads to social preferences that are not transitive.
c. violates the independence of irrelevant 
d. makes one person in effect a dictator.
5. Two political candidates are vying for town mayor, and 
the key issue is how much to spend on the annual 
Fourth of July fireworks. Among the 100 voters, 40 
want to spend $30,000, 30 want to spend $10,000, 
and 30 want to spend nothing at all. What is the win-
ning position on this issue?
6. The experiment called the ultimatum game illustrates 
a. are overconfident in their own abilities.
b. play the Nash equilibrium in strategic situations.
c. care about fairness, even to their own detriment.
d. make inconsistent decisions over time.
This chapter examined the frontier of microeconomics. You may have noticed that 
we sketched out ideas rather than fully developing 
--- PAGE 497 ---
PART VII   TOPICS FOR FURTHER STUDY
• In many economic transactions, information is asym-
metric. When there are hidden actions, principals may 
be concerned that agents suffer from the problem of 
moral hazard. When there are hidden characteris-
tics, buyers may be concerned about the problem of 
adverse selection among the sellers. Private markets 
sometimes deal with asymmetric information with sig-
• Although government policy can sometimes improve 
market outcomes, governments are themselves imper-
fect institutions. The Condorcet paradox shows that 
majority rule fails to produce transitive preferences for 
society, and Arrow’s impossibility theorem shows that 
no voting system will be perfect. In many situations, 
democratic institutions will produce the outcome 
desired by the median voter, regardless of the prefer-
ences of the rest of the electorate. Moreover, the indi-
viduals who set government policy may be motivated 
by self-interest rather than the national interest.
• The study of psychology and economics reveals that 
human decision making is more complex than is 
assumed in conventional economic theory. People are 
not always rational, they care about the fairness of eco-
nomic outcomes (even to their own detriment), and 
they can be inconsistent over time.
Arrow’s impossibility theorem, p. 459
median voter theorem, p. 460
behavioral economics, p. 461
1. What is moral hazard? List three things an employer 
might do to reduce the severity of this problem.
2. What is adverse selection? Give an example of a mar-
ket in which adverse selection might be a probl
--- PAGE 498 ---
CHAPTER 22   FRONTIERS OF MICROECONOMICS
4. The health insurance reform signed into law by President 
Obama in 2010 included the following two provisions:
i. Insurance companies must offer health insur-
ance to everyone who applies and charge them 
the same price regardless of a person’s preex-
ii. Everyone must buy health insurance or pay a 
a. Which of these policies taken on its own makes 
the problem of adverse selection worse? Explain.
b. Why do you think the policy you identified in 
part (a) was included in the law?
c. Why do you think the other policy was included 
5. Ken walks into an ice-cream parlor. 
Waiter: “We have vanilla and chocolate today.” 
Waiter: “I almost forgot. We also have strawberry.”
Ken: “In that case, I’ll take chocolate.”
What standard property of decision making is Ken 
 violating? (Hint: Reread the section on Arrow’s 
6. Three friends are choosing a restaurant for dinner. 
Here are their preferences:
a. If the three friends use a Borda count to make 
their decision, where do they go to eat?
b. On their way to their chosen restaurant, they 
see that the Mexican and French restaurants are 
closed, so they use a Borda count again to decide 
between the remaining two restaurants. Where do 
c. How do your answers to parts (a) and (b) relate to 
Arrow’s impossibility theorem?
7. Three friends are choosing a TV show to watch. Here 
a. If the three friends try using a Borda count to 
make their choice, what would happen?
b. Monica suggests a vote by majority rule. She pro-
poses that first they choose between Empire and 
Supergirl, and then they choo
--- PAGE 499 ---

--- PAGE 500 ---

