--- PAGE 502 ---
hen you finish school and start looking for a full-time job, your experience 
will, to a large extent, be shaped by prevailing economic conditions. In 
some years, firms throughout the economy are expanding their production 
of goods and services, employment is rising, and jobs are easy to find. In other 
years, firms are cutting back production, employment is declining, and finding a 
good job takes a long time. Not surprisingly, any college graduate would rather 
enter the labor force in a year of economic expansion than in a year of economic 
Because the health of the overall economy profoundly affects all of us, 
changes in economic conditions are widely reported by the 
--- PAGE 503 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
media. Indeed, it is hard to pick up a newspaper, check an online news service, 
or turn on the TV without seeing some newly reported statistic about the econ-
omy. The statistic might measure the total income of everyone in the economy 
(gross domestic product, or GDP), the rate at which average prices are rising or 
falling (inflation/deflation), the percentage of the labor force that is out of work 
(unemployment), total spending at stores (retail sales), or the imbalance of trade 
between the United States and the rest of the world (the trade deficit). All these 
statistics are macroeconomic. Rather than telling us about a particular household, 
firm, or market, they tell us something about the entire economy. 
As you may recall from Chapter 2, economics is divided into two branches: 
 microeconomics and macroeconomics. Microeconomics is the study of how 
 individual households and firms make decisions and how they interact with one 
another in markets. Macroeconomics is the study of the economy as a whole. 
The goal of macroeconomics is to explain the economic changes that affect many 
households, firms, and markets simultaneously. Macroeconomists address a broad 
variety of questions: Why is average income high in some countries and low in 
others? Why do prices sometimes rise rapidly while at other times they are more 
stable? Why do production and employment expand in some years and contract 
in others? What, if anything, can the government do to promote rapid growth in 
incomes, low inflation, and stable employment? These ques
--- PAGE 504 ---
CHAPTER 23   MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME 
transaction contributes equally to the economy’s income and to its expenditure. 
GDP, whether measured as total income or total expenditure, rises by $100.
Another way to see the equality of income and expenditure is with the circu-
lar-flow diagram in Figure 1. As you may recall from Chapter 2, this diagram 
describes all the transactions between households and firms in a simple econ-
omy. It simplifies matters by assuming that all goods and services are bought by 
households and that households spend all of their income. In this economy, when 
households buy goods and services from firms, these expenditures flow through 
the markets for goods and services. When the firms use the money they receive 
from sales to pay workers’ wages, landowners’ rent, and firm owners’ profit, this 
income flows through the markets for the factors of production. Money continu-
ously flows from households to firms and then back to households.
GDP measures this flow of money. We can compute it for this economy in one of 
two ways: by adding up the total expenditure by households or by adding up the total 
income (wages, rent, and profit) paid by firms. Because all expenditure in the economy 
ends up as someone’s income, GDP is the same regardless of how we compute it.
The actual economy is, of course, more complicated than the one illustrated 
in Figure 1. Households do not spend all of their income; they pay some of it to 
the government in taxes, and they save some for use in the future. In addition, 
households do not buy all goods and services prod
--- PAGE 505 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
Having discussed the meaning of gross domestic product in general terms, let’s 
be more precise about how this statistic is measured. Here is a definition of GDP 
that focuses on GDP as a measure of total expenditure: 
r (SPTTEPNFTUJDQSPEVDU	(%1
 is the market value of all final goods and ser-
vices produced within a country in a given period of time.
This definition might seem simple enough. But in fact, many subtle issues arise 
when computing an economy’s GDP. Let’s therefore consider each phrase in this 
definition with some care.
23-2a “GDP Is the Market Value . . .”
You have probably heard the adage “You can’t compare apples and oranges.” Yet 
GDP does exactly that. GDP adds together many different kinds of products into a 
single measure of the value of economic activity. To do this, it uses market prices. 
Because market prices measure the amount people are willing to pay for different 
goods, they reflect the value of those goods. If the price of an apple is twice the 
price of an orange, then an apple contributes twice as much to GDP as does an 
23-2b “. . . of All . . .”
GDP tries to be comprehensive. It includes all items produced in the economy and 
sold legally in markets. GDP measures the market value of not just apples and 
oranges but also pears and grapefruit, books and movies, haircuts and healthcare, 
GDP also includes the market value of the housing services provided by the 
economy’s stock of housing. For rental housing, this value is easy to calculate—
the rent equals both the tenant’s expenditure and the lan
--- PAGE 506 ---
CHAPTER 23   MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME 
of intermediate goods is already included in the prices of the final goods. Adding 
the market value of the paper to the market value of the card would be double 
counting. That is, it would (incorrectly) count the paper twice. 
An important exception to this principle arises when an intermediate good is 
produced and, rather than being used, is added to a firm’s inventory of goods for 
use or sale at a later date. In this case, the intermediate good is taken to be “final” 
for the moment, and its value as inventory investment is included as part of GDP. 
Thus, additions to inventory add to GDP, and when the goods in inventory are 
later used or sold, the reductions in inventory subtract from GDP. 
23-2d “. . . Goods and Services . . .”
GDP includes both tangible goods (food, clothing, cars) and intangible services 
(haircuts, housecleaning, doctor visits). When you buy a CD by your favorite 
band, you are buying a good, and the purchase price is part of GDP. When you 
pay to hear a concert by the same band, you are buying a service, and the ticket 
price is also part of GDP.
23-2e “. . . Produced . . .”
GDP includes goods and services currently produced. It does not include transac-
tions involving items produced in the past. When Ford produces and sells a new 
car, the value of the car is included in GDP. But when one person sells a used car 
to another person, the value of the used car is not included in GDP.
23-2f “. . . Within a Country . . .”
GDP measures the value of production within the geographic confines of a coun-
try. W
--- PAGE 507 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
hen the U.S. Department of Commerce computes the nation’s GDP, 
it also computes various other measures of income to get a more 
complete picture of what’s happening in the economy. These other mea-
sures differ from GDP by excluding or including certain categories of 
income. What follows is a brief description of five of these income mea-
sures, ordered from largest to smallest.
t Gross national product (GNP) is the total income earned by a 
nation’s permanent residents (called nationals). It differs from 
GDP in that it includes income that our citizens earn abroad and 
excludes income that foreigners earn here. For example, when a 
Canadian citizen works temporarily in the United States, her pro-
duction is part of U.S. GDP, but it is not part of U.S. GNP. (It is part 
of Canada’s GNP.) For most countries, including the United States, 
domestic residents are responsible for most domestic production, 
so GDP and GNP are quite close.
t Net national product (NNP) is the total income of a nation’s residents 
(GNP) minus losses from depreciation. Depreciation is the wear and 
tear on the economy’s stock of equipment and structures, such as 
trucks rusting and old computer models becoming obsolete. In the 
national income accounts prepared by the Department of Commerce, 
depreciation is called the “consumption of fixed capital.”
t National income is the total income earned by a nation’s resi-
dents in the production of goods and services. It is almost iden-
tical to net national product. These two measures differ because 
of the st
--- PAGE 508 ---
CHAPTER 23   MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME 
23-3 The Components of GDP
Spending in an economy takes many forms. At any moment, the Smith family 
may be having lunch at Burger King; Ford may be building a car factory; the 
U.S. Navy may be procuring a submarine; and British Airways may be buying 
an airplane from Boeing. GDP includes all of these various forms of spending on 
domestically produced goods and services.
To understand how the economy is using its scarce resources, economists 
study the composition of GDP among various types of spending. To do this, GDP 
(which we denote as Y) is divided into four components: consumption (C), invest-
ment (I), government purchases (G), and net exports (NX):
This equation is an identity—an equation that must be true because of how the 
variables in the equation are defined. In this case, because each dollar of expendi-
ture included in GDP is placed into one of the four components of GDP, the total 
of the four components must be equal to GDP. Let’s look at each of these four 
$POTVNQUJPO is spending by households on goods and services, with the excep-
tion of purchases of new housing. Goods include durable goods, such as automo-
biles and appliances, and nondurable goods, such as food and clothing. Services 
include such intangible items as haircuts and medical care. Household spending 
on education is also included in consumption of services (although one might 
argue that it would fit better in the next component). 
*OWFTUNFOU is the purchase of goods (called capital goods) that will be used in the 
future to produce more goods a
--- PAGE 509 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
Some nations are debating what 
to include in their national income 
No Sex, Please, We’re French
he government of France has just made 
what on the face of it appears to be a 
nonannouncement announcement: It will 
not include illegal drugs and prostitution in 
its official calculation of the country’s gross 
What made the announcement odd was 
that it never has included such activities, nor 
have most countries. Nor do most governments 
announce what they do not plan to do. (“The 
U.S. government has no intention of sending 
a man to Venus.”) Yet the French decision 
comes in the wake of significant pressure from 
neighboring countries and from the European 
Union to integrate these activities into national 
accounts and economic output. That raises a 
host of questions: Should these activities be 
included, and if those are, why not others? And 
what exactly are we measuring—and why?
Few numbers shape our world today more 
than GDP. It has become the alpha and omega 
of national success, used by politicians and 
pundits as the primary gauge of national 
strength and treated as a numerical proxy for 
greatness or the lack thereof.
Yet GDP is only a statistic, replete with 
the limitations of all statistics. Created as 
an outgrowth of national accounts that were 
themselves only devised in the 1930s, GDP 
was never an all-inclusive measure, even as it 
is treated as such. Multiple areas of economic 
life were left out, including volunteer work and 
Now Eurostat, the official statistical 
agency of the European Union, is leading the 

--- PAGE 510 ---
CHAPTER 23   MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME 
countries have different laws: In the Nether-
lands, for instance, prostitution is legal, as 
is marijuana. Those commercial transactions 
(or at least those that are recorded and taxed) 
are already part of Dutch GDP. Not including 
them in Italy’s or Spain’s GDPs can thus make 
it challenging to compare national numbers.
That is why Spain, Italy, Belgium, and the 
U.K. have in recent months moved to include 
illegal drugs and nonlicensed sex trade in their 
national accounts. The U.K. Office for National 
Statistics in particular approached its mandate 
with wonkish seriousness, publishing a 20-
page précis of its methodology that explained 
how it would, say, calculate the dollar amount 
of prostitution (police records help) or deal with 
domestically produced drugs versus imported 
drugs. The result, which will be formally an-
nounced in September, will be an additional 10 
billion pounds added to Great Britain’s GDP.
France, however, has demurred. A nation 
with a clichéd reputation for a certain savoir 
faire when it comes to sex and other nocturnal 
activities has decided (or at least its bureau-
crats have) that in spite of an EU directive, 
it will not calculate the effects of illegal 
activities that are often nonconsensual or 
nonvoluntary. That is clearly the case for some 
prostitution—one French minister stated that 
“street prostitution” is largely controlled by 
the Mafia—and the same could be reason-
ably said of the use of some hard drugs, given 
There is undeniably a strong moralistic 
component in the French deci
--- PAGE 511 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
23-4 Real versus Nominal GDP
As we have seen, GDP measures the total spending on goods and services in all 
markets in the economy. If total spending rises from one year to the next, at least 
one of two things must be true: (1) the economy is producing a larger output of 
goods and services, or (2) goods and services are being sold at higher prices. When 
studying changes in the economy over time, economists want to separate these 
two effects. In particular, they want a measure of the total quantity of goods and 
services the economy is producing that is not affected by changes in the prices of 
those goods and services. 
To do this, economists use a measure called real GDP. Real GDP answers a 
hypothetical question: What would be the value of the goods and services pro-
duced this year if we valued these goods and services at the prices that prevailed 
in some specific year in the past? By evaluating current production using prices 
that are fixed at past levels, real GDP shows how the economy’s overall produc-
tion of goods and services changes over time.
To see more precisely how real GDP is constructed, let’s consider an example.
Table 2 shows some data for an economy that produces only two goods: hot dogs 
and hamburgers. The table shows the prices and quantities produced of the two 
goods in the years 2016, 2017, and 2018.
To compute total spending in this economy, we would multiply the quantities 
of hot dogs and hamburgers by their prices. In the year 2016, 100 hot dogs are sold 
at a price of $1 per hot dog, so expenditure o
--- PAGE 512 ---
CHAPTER 23   MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME 
The table shows the calculation of nominal GDP for these 3 years. Total spend-
ing rises from $200 in 2016 to $600 in 2017 and then to $1,200 in 2018. Part of this 
rise is attributable to the increase in the quantities of hot dogs and hamburgers, 
and part is attributable to the increase in the prices of hot dogs and hamburgers.
To obtain a measure of the amount produced that is not affected by changes in 
prices, we use SFBM(%1, which is the production of goods and services valued at 
constant prices. We calculate real GDP by first designating 1 year as a base year. We 
then use the prices of hot dogs and hamburgers in the base year to compute the 
value of goods and services in all the years. In other words, the prices in the base 
year provide the basis for comparing quantities in different years.
Suppose that we choose 2016 to be the base year in our example. We can then 
use the prices of hot dogs and hamburgers in 2016 to compute the value of goods 
and services produced in 2016, 2017, and 2018. Table 2 shows these calculations. 
To compute real GDP for 2016, we use the prices of hot dogs and hamburgers in 
2016 (the base year) and the quantities of hot dogs and hamburgers produced in 
2016. (Thus, for the base year, real GDP always equals nominal GDP.) To com-
pute real GDP for 2017, we use the prices of hot dogs and hamburgers in 2016 
(the base year) and the quantities of hot dogs and hamburgers produced in 2017. 
Similarly, to compute real GDP for 2018, we use the prices in 2016 and the quan-
tities in 2018. When we find
--- PAGE 513 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
To sum up: Nominal GDP uses current prices to place a value on the economy’s produc-
tion of goods and services. Real GDP uses constant base-year prices to place a value on the 
economy’s production of goods and services. Because real GDP is not affected by changes 
in prices, changes in real GDP reflect only changes in the amounts being produced. 
Thus, real GDP is a measure of the economy’s production of goods and services. 
Our goal in computing GDP is to gauge how well the overall economy is per-
forming. Because real GDP measures the economy’s production of goods and ser-
vices, it reflects the economy’s ability to satisfy people’s needs and desires. Thus, 
real GDP is a better gauge of economic well-being than is nominal GDP. When 
economists talk about the economy’s GDP, they usually mean real GDP rather 
than nominal GDP. And when they talk about growth in the economy, they mea-
sure that growth as the percentage change in real GDP from one period to another.
As we have just seen, nominal GDP reflects both the quantities of goods and ser-
vices the economy is producing and the prices of those goods and services. By 
contrast, by holding prices constant at base-year levels, real GDP reflects only the 
quantities produced. From these two statistics, we can compute a third, called the 
GDP deflator, which reflects only the prices of goods and services.
The (%1EFGMBUPS is calculated as follows:
GDP deflator 5 Nominal GDP
Because nominal GDP and real GDP must be the same in the base year, the GDP 
deflator for the base year always 
--- PAGE 514 ---
CHAPTER 23   MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME 
A HALF CENTURY OF REAL GDP
Now that we know how real GDP is defined and measured, let’s look 
at what this macroeconomic variable tells us about the recent history 
of the United States. Figure 2 shows quarterly data on real GDP for 
the U.S. economy since 1965. 
The most obvious feature of these data is that real GDP grows over time. The real 
GDP of the U.S. economy in 2015 was more than four times its 1965 level. Put differently, 
the output of goods and services produced in the United States has grown on average 
about 3 percent per year. This continued growth in real GDP enables most Americans to 
enjoy greater economic prosperity than their parents and grandparents did.
A second feature of the GDP data is that growth is not steady. The upward climb 
of real GDP is occasionally interrupted by periods during which GDP declines, 
called recessions. Figure 2 marks recessions with shaded vertical bars. (There is no 
ironclad rule for when the official business cycle dating committee will declare 
that a recession has occurred, but an old rule of thumb is two consecutive quar-
ters of falling real GDP.) Recessions are associated not only with lower incomes but 
also with other forms of economic distress: rising unemployment, falling profits, 
increased bankruptcies, and so on.
Much of macroeconomics is aimed at explaining the long-run growth and short-
run fluctuations in real GDP. As we will see in the coming chapters, we need dif-
ferent models for these two purposes. Because the short-run fluctuations represent 
deviations from t
--- PAGE 515 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
GDP measures the economy’s total 
output. Labor productivity measures 
output per unit of labor input. If 
GDP is incorrectly measured, so is 
Silicon Valley Doesn’t Believe 
OUNTAIN VIEW, Calif.—Google Inc. chief 
economist Hal Varian is an evangelist for 
Silicon Valley’s contrarian take on America’s 
Swiveling to a large screen on the desk 
behind him, Mr. Varian types in a search 
for the most commonly asked question 
on the subject economists elsewhere are 
wringing their hands over. Up pops, “What is 
See, he says, vindicated: “Most people 
don’t know what it even means.”
To Mr. Varian and other wealthy brains 
in the world’s most innovative neighborhood, 
productivity means giving people and com-
panies tools to do things better and faster. 
By that measure, there is an explosion under 
way, thanks to the shiny gadgets, apps and 
digital geegaws spewing out of Silicon Valley.
Official U.S. figures tell a different story. 
For a decade, economic output per hour 
worked—the federal government’s formula 
for productivity—has barely budged…. Pro-
ductivity matters, economists point out, be-
cause at a 2% annual growth rate, it takes 35 
years to double the standard of living; at 1%, 
it takes 70. Low productivity growth slows the 
economy and holds down wages.
The 68-year-old Mr. Varian, dressed in a 
purple hoodie and khaki pants, says the U.S. 
doesn’t have a productivity problem, it has a 
measurement problem, a sound bite shaping 
up as the gospel according to Silicon Valley.
“There is a lack of appreciation for what’s 
happenin
--- PAGE 516 ---
CHAPTER 23   MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME 
arranged with friends. To find each other in 
the sprawling park nearby, he and his pals 
used an app that tracked their location, 
allowing them to meet up quickly. The same 
tool can track the movement of workers in a 
warehouse, office or shopping mall.
“Obviously that’s a productivity enhance-
ment,” Mr. Varian says. “But I doubt that gets 
Consider the efficiency of hailing a taxi 
with an app on your mobile phone, or finding 
someone who will meet you at the airport and 
rent your car while you’re away, a new service 
in San Francisco. Add in online tools that 
instantly translate conversations or help 
locate organ donors—the list goes on and on. 
Surely, Mr. Varian says, they also make the 
One problem with the government’s pro-
ductivity measure, Mr. Varian says, is that it 
is based on gross domestic product, the tally 
of goods and services produced by the U.S. 
economy. GDP was conceived in the 1930s, 
when economists worried mostly about how 
much, for example, steel and grain were pro-
duced—output easy to measure compared 
with digital goods and services.
Technological improvements and time-
saving apps are trickier. For one thing, it is 
tough to capture the full impact of quality 
improvements. For example, if a newer model 
car breaks down less often than older models 
but costs the same, the consumers’ gain can 
The U.S. Labor Department has sought 
to update its GDP measure over the years to 
include more intangibles, such as adjusting 
for higher quality. Productivity measures of 
computer chips, for example, ar
--- PAGE 517 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
omits the value of goods and services produced at home. When a chef prepares a 
delicious meal and sells it at her restaurant, the value of that meal is part of GDP. 
But if the chef prepares the same meal for her family, the value she has added to 
the raw ingredients is left out of GDP. Similarly, child care provided in day-care 
centers is part of GDP, whereas child care by parents at home is not. Volunteer 
work also contributes to the well-being of those in society, but GDP does not re-
flect these contributions. 
Another thing that GDP excludes is the quality of the environment. Imag-
ine that the government eliminated all environmental regulations. Firms could 
then produce goods and services without considering the pollution they create, 
Can we do better than using gross  
Nations Seek Success Beyond 
oney isn’t everything. But in measuring 
the success of nations, it isn’t easy to 
Political leaders are increasingly  expressing 
dissatisfaction with gross domestic  product—a 
monetary measure of all the goods and services 
a country produces—as a gauge of a nation’s 
success in raising living standards. 
In November, British Prime Minister David 
Cameron announced plans to build measures 
of national well-being that would take into 
account factors such as peoples’ life satis-
faction, following a similar effort by French 
President Nicolas Sarkozy.
Their efforts cut to the core of what eco-
nomics is supposed to be about: What makes 
us better off? How can we all have more of it? 
Anyone hoping for a clear-cut answer, though
--- PAGE 518 ---
CHAPTER 23   MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME 
and GDP might rise. Yet well-being would most likely fall. The deterioration 
in the quality of air and water would more than offset the gains from greater 
GDP also says nothing about the distribution of income. A society in which 
100 people have annual incomes of $50,000 has GDP of $5 million and, not sur-
prisingly, GDP per person of $50,000. So does a society in which 10 people earn 
$500,000 and 90 suffer with nothing at all. Few people would look at those two 
situations and call them equivalent. GDP per person tells us what happens 
to the average person, but behind the average lies a large variety of personal 
Source: Peter Klenow and Charles Jones, Stanford University. Data are for 2000.
For the purpose of comparing well-being 
across countries, asking people how they feel 
might be better than monetary measures. 
Angus Deaton, an economist at Princeton 
University, notes that placing values on the 
extremely different goods and services con-
sumed in the U.S. and, say, Tajikistan, can 
be impossible to do in a comparable way. Just 
asking people about their situation could be 
much easier and no less accurate.
Surveys already play a meaningful role in 
the way many countries assess their perfor-
mance, from consumer confidence in the U.S. 
to the Netherlands’s Life Situation Index, which 
accounts for factors such as relationships 
and community involvement. 
As part of its effort to gauge well-being, 
the U.K. plans to add more subjective ques-
tions to its household surveys.
But surveys can also send misleading policy 

--- PAGE 519 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
Source: Human Development Report 2015, 
United Nations. Real GDP is for 2014, 
expressed in 2011 dollars. Average years 
of schooling is among adults 25 years 
In the end, we can conclude that GDP is a good measure of economic well-
being for most—but not all—purposes. It is important to keep in mind what GDP 
includes and what it leaves out.
INTERNATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN GDP AND THE QUALITY OF LIFE
One way to gauge the usefulness of GDP as a measure of economic 
well-being is to examine international data. Rich and poor countries 
have vastly different levels of GDP per person. If a large GDP leads 
to a higher standard of living, then we should observe GDP to be strongly cor-
related with various measures of the quality of life. And, in fact, we do. 
Table 3 shows twelve large nations ranked in order of GDP per person. The table 
also shows life expectancy at birth, the average years of schooling among adults, 
and an index of life satisfaction based on asking people to gauge how they feel 
about their lives on a scale of 0 to 10 (with 10 being the best). These data show 
a clear pattern. In rich countries, such as the United States and Germany, people 
can expect to live to about 80, have about 13 years of schooling, and rate their life 
satisfaction at about 7. In poor countries, such as Bangladesh and Pakistan, people 
typically die about 10 years earlier, have less than half as much schooling, and rate 
their life satisfaction about 2 points lower on the 10-point scale. 
Data on other aspects of the quality of life tell a similar 
--- PAGE 520 ---
CHAPTER 23   MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME 
In this chapter we learned how economists measure the total income of a nation. 
Measurement is, of course, only a starting point. Much of macroeconomics is 
aimed at revealing the long-run and short-run determinants of a nation’s gross 
domestic product. Why, for example, is GDP higher in the United States and 
 Japan than in India and Nigeria? What can the governments of the poorest coun-
tries do to promote more rapid GDP growth? Why does GDP in the United States 
rise rapidly in some years and fall in others? What can U.S. policymakers do to 
reduce the severity of these fluctuations in GDP? These are the questions we will 
At this point, it is important to acknowledge the significance of just measur-
ing GDP. We all get some sense of how the economy is doing as we go about our 
lives. But the economists who study changes in the economy and the policymak-
ers who formulate economic policies need more than this vague sense—they need 
concrete data on which to base their judgments. Quantifying the behavior of the 
economy with statistics such as GDP is, therefore, the first step to developing a 
science of macroeconomics.
1. If the price of a hot dog is $2 and the price of a ham-
burger is $4, then 30 hot dogs contribute as much to 
2. Angus the sheep farmer sells wool to Barnaby the 
knitter for $20. Barnaby makes two sweaters, each of 
which has a market price of $40. Collette buys one of 
them, while the other remains on the shelf of Barna-
by’s store to be sold later. What is GDP here?
3. Which of the following does NOT add to
--- PAGE 521 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
1. Explain why an economy’s income must equal its 
2. Which contributes more to GDP—the production of 
an economy car or the production of a luxury car? 
3. A farmer sells wheat to a baker for $2. The baker uses 
the wheat to make bread, which is sold for $3. What is 
the total contribution of these transactions to GDP?
4. Many years ago, Peggy paid $500 to put together a re-
cord collection. Today, she sold her albums at a garage 
sale for $100. How does this sale affect current GDP?
5. List the four components of GDP. Give an example of 
6. Why do economists use real GDP rather than nominal 
GDP to gauge economic well-being?
7. In the year 2017, the economy produces 100 loaves of 
bread that sell for $2 each. In the year 2018, the econ-
omy produces 200 loaves of bread that sell for $3 each. 
Calculate nominal GDP, real GDP, and the GDP defla-
tor for each year. (Use 2017 as the base year.) By what 
percentage does each of these three statistics rise from 
8. Why is it desirable for a country to have a large GDP? 
Give an example of something that would raise GDP 
r Because every transaction has a buyer and a seller, the 
total expenditure in the economy must equal the total 
r Gross domestic product (GDP) measures an econo-
my’s total expenditure on newly produced goods and 
services and the total income earned from the produc-
tion of these goods and services. More precisely, GDP 
is the market value of all final goods and services pro-
duced within a country in a given period of time.
r GDP is divided among four components of e
--- PAGE 522 ---
CHAPTER 23   MEASURING A NATION’S INCOME 
1. What components of GDP (if any) would each of the 
following transactions affect? Explain.
a. Uncle Henry buys a new refrigerator from a  
b. Aunt Jane buys a new house from a local builder.
c. The Jackson family buys an old Victorian house 
d. You pay a hairdresser for a haircut.
e. Ford sells a Mustang from its inventory to the 
f. Ford manufactures a Focus and sells it to Avis, the 
g. California hires workers to repave Highway 101.
h. The federal government sends your grandmother 
i. Your parents buy a bottle of French wine.
j.  Honda expands its factory in Ohio.
3. The government purchases component of GDP does 
not include spending on transfer payments such as 
Social Security. Thinking about the definition of GDP, 
explain why transfer payments are excluded. 
4. As the chapter states, GDP does not include the value 
of used goods that are resold. Why would including 
such transactions make GDP a less informative mea-
sure of economic well-being?
5. Below are some data from the land of milk and honey. 
a. Compute nominal GDP, real GDP, and the GDP 
deflator for each year, using 2016 as the base year.
b. Compute the percentage change in nominal GDP, 
real GDP, and the GDP deflator in 2017 and 2018 
from the preceding year. For each year, identify 
the variable that does not change. Explain why 
c. Did economic well-being increase more in 2017 or 
6. Consider an economy that produces only chocolate 
bars. In year 1, the quantity produced is 3 bars and the 
price is $4. In year 2, the quantity produced is 4 bars 
and the price
--- PAGE 523 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
into bread, which she sells to consumers for $180. Con-
a. What is GDP in this economy? Explain.
b. Value added is defined as the value of a producer’s 
output minus the value of the intermediate goods 
that the producer buys to make the output. Assum-
ing there are no intermediate goods beyond those 
described above, calculate the value added of each of 
c. What is total value added of the three producers in 
this economy? How does it compare to the econo-
my’s GDP? Does this example suggest another way 
10. Goods and services that are not sold in markets, such 
as food produced and consumed at home, are generally 
not included in GDP. Can you think of how this might 
cause the numbers in the second column of Table 3 to be 
misleading in a comparison of the economic well-being of 
the United States and India? Explain.
11. The participation of women in the U.S. labor force has 
risen dramatically since 1970.
a. How do you think this rise affected GDP?
b. Now imagine a measure of well-being that includes 
time spent working in the home and taking leisure. 
How would the change in this measure of well-being 
compare to the change in GDP?
c. Can you think of other aspects of well-being  
that are associated with the rise in women’s  
labor-force participation? Would it be practical to 
construct a measure of well-being that includes 
12. One day, Barry the Barber, Inc., collects $400 for hair-
cuts. Over this day, his equipment depreciates in value 
by $50. Of the remaining $350, Barry sends $30 to the 
government in sales taxes, takes ho
--- PAGE 524 ---
n 1931, as the U.S. economy was suffering through the Great Depression, the 
New York Yankees paid famed baseball player Babe Ruth a salary of $80,000. 
At the time, this pay was extraordinary, even among the stars of baseball. 
According to one story, a reporter asked Ruth whether he thought it was right 
that he made more than President Herbert Hoover, who had a salary of $75,000. 
Ruth replied, “I had a better year.”
In 2015, the average salary earned by major league baseball players was about 
$4 million, and Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher Clayton Kershaw was paid $31 
million. At first, this fact might lead you to think that baseball has become 
vastly more lucrative over the past eight decades. But as everyone 
knows, the prices of goods and services have also risen. 
Measuring the Cost of Living
