--- PAGE 524 ---
n 1931, as the U.S. economy was suffering through the Great Depression, the 
New York Yankees paid famed baseball player Babe Ruth a salary of $80,000. 
At the time, this pay was extraordinary, even among the stars of baseball. 
According to one story, a reporter asked Ruth whether he thought it was right 
that he made more than President Herbert Hoover, who had a salary of $75,000. 
Ruth replied, “I had a better year.”
In 2015, the average salary earned by major league baseball players was about 
$4 million, and Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher Clayton Kershaw was paid $31 
million. At first, this fact might lead you to think that baseball has become 
vastly more lucrative over the past eight decades. But as everyone 
knows, the prices of goods and services have also risen. 
Measuring the Cost of Living
--- PAGE 525 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
In 1931, a nickel would buy an ice-cream cone and a quarter would buy a ticket 
at the local movie theater. Because prices were so much lower in Babe Ruth’s day 
than they are today, it is not clear whether Ruth enjoyed a higher or lower stan-
dard of living than today’s players. 
In the preceding chapter, we looked at how economists use gross domestic 
product (GDP) to measure the quantity of goods and services that the economy is 
producing. This chapter examines how economists measure the overall cost of liv-
ing. To compare Babe Ruth’s salary of $80,000 to salaries from today, we need to 
find some way of turning dollar figures into meaningful measures of purchasing 
power. That is exactly the job of a statistic called the consumer price index, or sim-
ply the CPI. After seeing how the CPI is constructed, we discuss how we can use 
such a price index to compare dollar figures from different points in time.
The CPI is used to monitor changes in the cost of living over time. When the 
CPI rises, the typical family has to spend more money to maintain the same stan-
dard of living. Economists use the term inflation to describe a situation in which 
the economy’s overall price level is rising. The inflation rate is the percentage 
change in the price level from the previous period. The preceding chapter showed 
how economists can measure inflation using the GDP deflator. The inflation rate 
you are likely to hear on the nightly news, however, is calculated from the CPI, 
which better reflects the goods and services bought by consumers.

--- PAGE 526 ---
CHAPTER 24   MEASURING THE COST OF LIVING
3. Compute the basket’s cost. Use the data on prices to calculate the cost of 
the basket of goods and services at different times. The table shows this 
calculation for each of the three years. Notice that only the prices in this 
calculation change. By keeping the basket of goods the same (4 hot dogs and 
2 hamburgers), we are isolating the effects of price changes from the effects of 
any quantity changes that might be occurring at the same time.
4. Choose a base year and compute the index. Designate one year as the base year, the 
benchmark against which other years are to be compared. (The choice of base 
year is arbitrary. The index is used to measure percentage changes in the cost 
of living, and these changes are the same regardless of the choice of base year.) 
Once the base year is chosen, the index is calculated as follows:
Price of basket of goods and services in current year
Price of basket in base year
That is, the price of the basket of goods and services in each year is divided by 
the price of the basket in the base year, and this ratio is then multiplied by 100. 
The resulting number is the CPI.
In the example in Table 1, 2016 is the base year. In this year, the basket of 
hot dogs and hamburgers costs $8. Therefore, to calculate the CPI, the price of 
the basket in each year is divided by $8 and multiplied by 100. The CPI is 100 
in 2016. (The index is always 100 in the base year.) The CPI is 175 in 2017. This 
means that the price of the basket in 2017 is 175 percent of its price in the base 
year. Put differentl
--- PAGE 527 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
$175 in 2017. Similarly, the CPI is 250 in 2018, indicating that the price level in 
2018 is 250 percent of the price level in the base year.
5. Compute the inflation rate. Use the CPI to calculate the inflation rate, which is 
the percentage change in the price index from the preceding period. That is, 
the inflation rate between two consecutive years is computed as follows:
Inflation rate in year 2 5
CPI in year 2 2 CPI in year 1
As shown at the bottom of Table 1, the inflation rate in our example is 75 per-
cent in 2017 and 43 percent in 2018.
Although this example simplifies the real world by including only two goods, it 
shows how the BLS computes the CPI and the inflation rate. The BLS collects and 
processes data on the prices of thousands of goods and services every month and, 
by following the five foregoing steps, determines how quickly the cost of living for 
the typical consumer is rising. When the BLS makes its monthly announcement of 
the CPI, you can usually hear the number on the evening television news or see it 
in the next day’s newspaper.
In addition to the CPI for the overall economy, the BLS calculates several 
other price indexes. It reports the index for some narrow categories of goods and 
services, such as food, clothing, and energy. It also calculates the CPI for all goods 
What’s in the CPI’s Basket?
hen constructing the consumer price index, the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics tries to include all the goods and services that the typi-
cal consumer buys. Moreover, it tries to weight these goods and services 
acc
--- PAGE 528 ---
CHAPTER 24   MEASURING THE COST OF LIVING
and services excluding food and energy, a statistic called the core CPI. Because 
food and energy prices show substantial short-run volatility, the core CPI better 
reflects ongoing inflation trends. Finally, the BLS also calculates the producer 
price index (PPI), which measures the cost of a basket of goods and services 
bought by firms rather than consumers. Because firms eventually pass on their 
costs to consumers in the form of higher consumer prices, changes in the PPI are 
often thought to be useful in predicting changes in the CPI. 
24-1b Problems in Measuring the Cost of Living
The goal of the consumer price index is to measure changes in the cost of living. 
In other words, the CPI tries to gauge how much incomes must rise to maintain a 
constant standard of living. The CPI, however, is not a perfect measure of the cost of 
living. Three problems with the index are widely acknowledged but difficult to solve.
The first problem is called substitution bias. When prices change from one year 
to the next, they do not all change proportionately: Some prices rise more than 
others. Consumers respond to these differing price changes by buying less of the 
goods whose prices have risen by relatively large amounts and by buying more 
of the goods whose prices have risen less or perhaps even have fallen. That is, 
consumers substitute toward goods that have become relatively less expensive. 
If a price index is computed assuming a fixed basket of goods, it ignores the 
possibility of consumer substitution and, therefore, overstates 
--- PAGE 529 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
however, did not decrease in response to the introduction of the iPod. Eventually, 
the BLS revised the basket of goods to include the iPod, and subsequently, the 
index reflected changes in iPod prices. But the reduction in the cost of living 
associated with the initial introduction of the iPod never showed up in the index. 
The third problem with the CPI is unmeasured quality change. If the quality of a 
good deteriorates from one year to the next while its price remains the same, the 
value of a dollar falls, because you are getting a lesser good for the same amount 
of money. Similarly, if the quality rises from one year to the next, the value of 
a dollar rises. The BLS does its best to account for quality change. When the 
quality of a good in the basket changes—for example, when a car model has more 
horsepower or gets better gas mileage from one year to the next—the Bureau 
adjusts the price of the good to account for the quality change. It is, in essence, 
The web is providing alternative ways 
to collect data on the overall level of 
Do We Need Google to Measure 
t some 23,000 retailers and businesses 
in 90 U.S. cities, hundreds of government 
workers find and mark down prices on very pre-
cise products. And I’m not kidding when I say 
Say the relevant worker is finding the 
price for a motel room. She might write a 
report like this: Occupancy—two adults; 
Type of accommodation—deluxe room; Room 
classification/location—ocean view, room 306; 
Time of stay—weekend; Length of stay—one 
night; Bathroom facilities—one full bat
--- PAGE 530 ---
CHAPTER 24   MEASURING THE COST OF LIVING
trying to compute the price of a basket of goods of constant quality. Despite these 
efforts, changes in quality remain a problem because quality is hard to measure.
There is still much debate among economists about how severe these 
measurement problems are and what should be done about them. Several studies 
written during the 1990s concluded that the CPI overstated inflation by about 1 
percentage point per year. In response to this criticism, the BLS adopted several 
technical changes to improve the CPI, and many economists believe that the bias 
is now only about half as large as it once was. The issue is important because 
many government programs use the CPI to adjust for changes in the overall 
level of prices. Recipients of Social Security, for instance, get annual increases in 
benefits that are tied to the CPI. Some economists have suggested modifying these 
programs to correct for the measurement problems by, for instance, reducing the 
magnitude of the automatic benefit increases.
2007, economists Roberto Rigobon and 
Alberto Cavallo started tracking prices online 
and inputting them into a massive database. 
Then, last month, they unveiled the Billion 
Prices Project, an inflation measure based on 
5 million items sold by 300 online retailers in 
70 countries. (For the United States, the BPP 
collects about 500,000 prices.) 
The BPP’s inflation measure is markedly 
different from the government’s. The economists 
just average all the prices culled online, 
meaning the basket of goods is whatever you 
can buy on the Web
--- PAGE 531 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
24-1c The GDP Deflator versus the Consumer Price Index
In the preceding chapter, we examined another measure of the overall level of 
prices in the economy—the GDP deflator. The GDP deflator is the ratio of nominal 
GDP to real GDP. Because nominal GDP is current output valued at current prices 
and real GDP is current output valued at base-year prices, the GDP deflator 
reflects the current level of prices relative to the level of prices in the base year.
Economists and policymakers monitor both the GDP deflator and the CPI to 
gauge how quickly prices are rising. Usually, these two statistics tell a similar 
story. Yet two important differences can cause them to diverge.
The first difference is that the GDP deflator reflects the prices of all goods and 
services produced domestically, whereas the CPI reflects the prices of all goods and 
services bought by consumers. For example, suppose that the price of an airplane 
produced by Boeing and sold to the Air Force rises. Even though the plane is 
part of GDP, it is not part of the basket of goods and services bought by a typical 
consumer. Thus, the price increase shows up in the GDP deflator but not in 
As another example, suppose that Volvo raises the price of its cars. Because 
Volvos are made in Sweden, the car is not part of U.S. GDP. But U.S. consumers 
buy Volvos, so the car is part of the typical consumer’s basket of goods. Hence, a 
price increase in an imported consumption good, such as a Volvo, shows up in the 
CPI but not in the GDP deflator.
This first difference between t
--- PAGE 532 ---
CHAPTER 24   MEASURING THE COST OF LIVING
24-2  Correcting Economic Variables for the 
The purpose of measuring the overall level of prices in the economy is to allow 
us to compare dollar figures from different times. Now that we know how price 
indexes are calculated, let’s see how we might use such an index to compare a 
dollar figure from the past to a dollar figure in the present.
24-2a Dollar Figures from Different Times
We first return to the issue of Babe Ruth’s salary. Was his salary of $80,000 in 1931 
high or low compared to the salaries of today’s players?
To answer this question, we need to know the level of prices in 1931 and the 
level of prices today. Part of the increase in baseball salaries compensates players 
for higher prices today. To compare Ruth’s salary to those of today’s players, we 
need to inflate Ruth’s salary to turn 1931 dollars into today’s dollars.
The formula for turning dollar figures from year T into today’s dollars is the 
Amount in todayrs dollars 5 Amount in year T dollars 3
A price index such as the CPI measures the price level and thus determines the 
size of the inflation correction.
Let’s apply this formula to Ruth’s salary. Government statistics show a CPI of 
15.2 for 1931 and 237 for 2015. Thus, the overall level of prices has risen by a factor 
two measures of inflation 
Source: U.S. Department of Labor;  
U.S. Department of Commerce.
--- PAGE 533 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
of 15.6 (calculated from 237/15.2). We can use these numbers to measure Ruth’s 
salary in 2015 dollars, as follows:
Salary in 2015 dollars 5 Salary in 1931 dollars 3 Price level in 2015
We find that Babe Ruth’s 1931 salary is equivalent to a salary today of over 
$1.2 million. That is a good income, but it is only a third of the average player’s 
salary today and only 4 percent of what the Dodgers pay Clayton Kershaw. 
Various forces, including overall economic growth and the increasing income 
shares earned by superstars, have substantially raised the living standards of the 
Let’s also examine President Hoover’s 1931 salary of $75,000. To translate 
that figure into 2015 dollars, we again multiply the ratio of the price levels in the 
two years. We find that Hoover’s salary is equivalent to $75,000 3 (237/15.2), or 
$1,169,408 in 2015 dollars. This is well above President Barack Obama’s salary of 
$400,000. It seems that President Hoover did have a pretty good year after all.
Mr. Index Goes to Hollywood
hat is the most popular movie of all time? The answer might 
Movie popularity is usually gauged by box office receipts. By 
that measure, Star Wars: The Force Awakens is the number-one 
movie of all time with domestic receipts of $923 million, followed 
a n d  Ti t a n i c  ( $ 6 5 9 
million). But this ranking 
tickets, have been rising 
over time. Inflation gives an advantage to newer films.
When we correct box office receipts for the effects of inflation, the 
story is very different. The number-one movie is now Gone with the Wind 
--- PAGE 534 ---
CHAPTER 24   MEASURING THE COST OF LIVING
Regional Variation in the 
the cost of living in the 
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce.  
2013 Regional Price Parities by State (US = 100)
Cost of Living Relative to U.S. Average
REGIONAL DIFFERENCES IN THE COST OF LIVING
When you graduate from college, you may well have several job offers 
from which to choose. Not surprisingly, some jobs pay more than 
others. If the jobs are located in different places, however, be careful 
when comparing them. The cost of living varies not only over time but 
also over geography. What seems like a larger paycheck might not turn out to be so 
once you take into account regional differences in the prices of goods and services.
The Bureau of Economic Analysis has used the data collected for the CPI to 
compare prices around the United States. The resulting statistic is called regional 
price parities. Just as the CPI measures variation in the cost of living from year to 
year, regional price parities measure variation in the cost of living from state to state.
Figure 3 shows the regional price parities for 2013. For example, living in the 
state of New York costs 115.3 percent of what it costs to live in the typical place in 
the United States (that is, New York is 15.3 percent more expensive than average). 
--- PAGE 535 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
Living in Mississippi costs 86.8 percent of what it costs to live in the typical place 
(that is, Mississippi is 13.2 percent less expensive than average).
What accounts for these differences? It turns out that the prices of goods, such 
as food and clothing, explain only a small part of these regional differences. Most 
goods are tradable: They can be easily transported from one state to another. 
As a consequence of regional trade, large price disparities are unlikely to persist 
Services explain a larger part of these regional differences. A haircut, for example, 
can cost more in one state than another. If barbers were willing to move to where the 
price of a haircut is high, or if customers were willing to fly across the country in search 
of cheap haircuts, then the prices of haircuts across regions might well converge. But 
because transporting haircuts is so costly, large price disparities can persist.
Housing services are particularly important for understanding regional 
differences in the cost of living. Such services represent a large share of a typical 
consumer’s budget. Moreover, once built, a house or apartment building can’t 
easily be moved, and the land on which it sits is completely immobile. As a result, 
differences in housing costs can be persistently large. For example, rents in New 
York are almost twice what they are in Mississippi.
Keep these facts in mind when it comes time to compare job offers. Look not only 
at the dollar salaries but also at the local prices of goods and services, especially 
As we have 
--- PAGE 536 ---
CHAPTER 24   MEASURING THE COST OF LIVING
accumulated $100 in interest, she withdraws her $1,100. Is Sally $100 richer than 
she was when she made the deposit a year earlier?
The answer depends on what we mean by “richer.” Sally does have $100 more 
than she had before. In other words, the number of dollars in her possession has 
risen by 10 percent. But Sally does not care about the amount of money itself: She 
cares about what she can buy with it. If prices have risen while her money was 
in the bank, each dollar now buys less than it did a year ago. In this case, her 
purchasing power—the amount of goods and services she can buy—has not risen 
To keep things simple, let’s suppose that Sally is a movie fan and buys only 
DVDs. When Sally made her deposit, a DVD cost $10. Her deposit of $1,000 was 
equivalent to 100 DVDs. A year later, after getting her 10 percent interest, she has 
$1,100. How many DVDs can she buy now? It depends on what has happened to 
the price of a DVD. Here are some examples:
r Zero inflation: If the price of a DVD remains at $10, the amount she can buy 
has risen from 100 to 110 DVDs. The 10 percent increase in the number of 
dollars means a 10 percent increase in her purchasing power.
r Six percent inflation: If the price of a DVD rises from $10 to $10.60, then the 
number of DVDs she can buy has risen from 100 to approximately 104. Her 
purchasing power has increased by about 4 percent. 
r Ten percent inflation: If the price of a DVD rises from $10 to $11, she can 
still buy only 100 DVDs. Even though Sally’s dollar wealth has risen, her 
purc
--- PAGE 537 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
nominal and real interest 
real interest rate is the 
real interest rates often 
Source: U.S. Department of Labor;  
U.S. Department of Treasury.
INTEREST RATES IN THE U.S. ECONOMY
Figure 4 shows real and nominal interest rates in the U.S. economy 
since 1965. The nominal interest rate in this figure is the rate on three-
month Treasury bills (although data on other interest rates would be 
similar). The real interest rate is computed by subtracting the rate of 
inflation from this nominal interest rate. Here the inflation rate is measured as the 
percentage change in the CPI.
One feature of this figure is that the nominal interest rate almost always exceeds 
the real interest rate. This reflects the fact that the U.S. economy has experienced 
rising consumer prices in almost every year during this period. By contrast, if you 
look at data for the U.S. economy during the late 19th century or for the Japanese 
economy in some recent years, you will find periods of deflation. During deflation, 
the real interest rate exceeds the nominal interest rate. 
The figure also shows that because inflation is variable, real and nominal interest 
rates do not always move together. For example, in the late 1970s, nominal interest 
rates were high. But because inflation was very high, real interest rates were low. 
Indeed, during much of the 1970s, real interest rates were negative, for inflation 
eroded people’s savings more quickly than nominal interest payments increased 
them. By contrast, in the late 1990s, nominal interest rates were lower than
--- PAGE 538 ---
CHAPTER 24   MEASURING THE COST OF LIVING
overall level of prices have been the norm. Such inflation reduces the purchasing 
power of each unit of money over time. When comparing dollar figures from 
different times, it is important to keep in mind that a dollar today is not the same 
as a dollar 20 years ago or, most likely, 20 years from now.
This chapter has discussed how economists measure the overall level of prices 
in the economy and how they use price indexes to correct economic variables 
for the effects of inflation. Price indexes allow us to compare dollar figures from 
different points in time and, therefore, get a better sense of how the economy is 
The discussion of price indexes in this chapter, together with the preceding 
chapter’s discussion of GDP, is only the first step in the study of macroeconomics. 
We have not yet examined what determines a nation’s GDP or the causes and 
effects of inflation. To do that, we need to go beyond issues of measurement. 
Indeed, that is our next task. Having explained how economists measure 
macroeconomic quantities and prices in the past two chapters, we are now ready 
to develop the models that explain movements in these variables.
Here is our strategy in the upcoming chapters. First, we look at the long-run 
determinants of real GDP and related variables, such as saving, investment, real 
interest rates, and unemployment. Second, we look at the long-run determinants 
of the price level and related variables, such as the money supply, inflation, and 
nominal interest rates. Last of all, having seen how these variables a
--- PAGE 539 ---
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
r The consumer price index (CPI) shows the cost of 
a basket of goods and services relative to the cost of 
the same basket in the base year. The index is used 
to measure the overall level of prices in the economy. 
The percentage change in the CPI measures the 
r The CPI is an imperfect measure of the cost of living 
for three reasons. First, it does not take into account 
consumers’ ability to substitute toward goods that 
become relatively cheaper over time. Second, it does 
not take into account increases in the purchasing 
power of the dollar due to the introduction of new 
goods. Third, it is distorted by unmeasured changes 
in the quality of goods and services. Because of these 
measurement problems, the CPI overstates true 
r Like the CPI, the GDP deflator measures the overall 
level of prices in the economy. The two price indexes 
usually move together, but there are important 
differences. The GDP deflator differs from the CPI 
because it includes goods and services produced 
rather than goods and services consumed. As a result, 
imported goods affect the CPI but not the GDP deflator. 
In addition, while the CPI uses a fixed basket of goods, 
the GDP deflator automatically changes the group of 
goods and services over time as the composition of 
r Dollar figures from different times do not represent a 
valid comparison of purchasing power. To compare a 
dollar figure from the past to a dollar figure today, the 
older figure should be inflated using a price index. 
r Various laws and private contracts use price indexes 

--- PAGE 540 ---
CHAPTER 24   MEASURING THE COST OF LIVING
1. Suppose that the year you were born someone bought 
$100 of goods and services for your baby shower. How 
much would you guess it would cost today to buy a 
similar amount of goods and services? Now find data 
on the CPI and compute the answer based on it. (You 
can find the BLS’s inflation calculator here: http://
www.bls.gov/data/inflation_calculator.htm).
2. The residents of Vegopia spend all of their income on 
cauliflower, broccoli, and carrots. In 2016, they spend 
a total of $200 for 100 heads of cauliflower, $75 for 50 
bunches of broccoli, and $50 for 500 carrots. In 2017, 
they spend a total of $225 for 75 heads of cauliflower, 
$120 for 80 bunches of broccoli, and $100 for  
a. Calculate the price of one unit of each vegetable in 
b. Using 2016 as the base year, calculate the CPI for 
c. What is the inflation rate in 2017?
3. Suppose that people consume only three goods, as 
a. What is the percentage change in the price of each 
b. Using a method similar to the CPI, compute the 
percentage change in the overall price level.
c. If you were to learn that a bottle of Gatorade 
increased in size from 2017 to 2018, should that 
information affect your calculation of the inflation 
d. If you were to learn that Gatorade introduced new 
flavors in 2018, should that information affect 
your calculation of the inflation rate? If so, how?
4. Go to the website of the Bureau of Labor Statistics 
(http://www.bls.gov) and find data on the CPI. By 
how much has the index including all items risen over 
the past year? For which categor
--- PAGE 541 ---
9. Suppose that a borrower and a lender agree on the 
nominal interest rate to be paid on a loan. Then infla-
tion turns out to be higher than they both expected.
a. Is the real interest rate on this loan higher or lower 
b. Does the lender gain or lose from this 
unexpectedly high inflation? Does the borrower 
c. Inflation during the 1970s was much higher 
than most people had expected when the decade 
began. How did this affect homeowners who 
obtained fixed-rate mortgages during the 1960s? 
How did it affect the banks that lent the money?
PART VIII   THE DATA OF MACROECONOMICS
--- PAGE 542 ---

