--- PAGE 544 ---
hen you travel around the world, you see tremendous variation in the 
standard of living. The average income in a rich country, such as the United 
States, Japan, or Germany, is about ten times the average income in a poor 
country, such as India, Nigeria, or Nicaragua. These large differences in income 
are reflected in large differences in the quality of life. People in richer countries 
have better nutrition, safer housing, better healthcare, and longer life expectancy 
as well as more automobiles, more telephones, and more computers. 
Even within a country, there are large changes in the standard of living over 
time. In the United States over the past century, average income as measured 
by real gross domestic product (GDP) per person has grown by 
about 2 percent per year. Although 2 percent might 
--- PAGE 545 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
seem small, this rate of growth implies that average income doubles every 35 
years. Because of this growth, most Americans enjoy much greater economic 
prosperity than did their parents, grandparents, and great-grandparents. 
Growth rates vary substantially from country to country. From 2000 to 2014, 
GDP per person in China grew at a rate of 11 percent per year, accumulating to 
a 357 percent increase in average income. A country experiencing such rapid 
growth can, in one generation, go from being among the poorest in the world to 
being among the richest. By contrast, in the same time span, income per person in 
Zimbabwe fell by a total of 13 percent, leaving the typical citizen mired in poverty.
What explains these diverse experiences? How can rich countries maintain 
their high standard of living? What policies can poor countries pursue to promote 
more rapid growth and join the developed world? These are among the most 
important questions in macroeconomics. As the Nobel-Prize-winning economist 
Robert Lucas put it, “The consequences for human welfare in questions like these 
are simply staggering: Once one starts to think about them, it is hard to think 
In the previous two chapters, we discussed how economists measure mac-
roeconomic quantities and prices. We can now begin to study the forces that 
determine these variables. As we have seen, an economy’s GDP measures both 
the total income earned in the economy and the total
--- PAGE 546 ---
CHAPTER 25   PRODUCTION AND GROWTH
The last column of the table shows each country’s growth rate. The growth 
rate measures how rapidly real income per person grew in the typical year. In 
the United States, for example, where real income per person was $4,264 in 1870 
and $55,860 in 2014, the growth rate was 1.80 percent per year. This means that 
if real income per person, beginning at $4,264, were to increase by 1.80 percent 
for each of 144 years, it would end up at $55,860. Of course, income did not rise 
exactly 1.80 percent every year: Some years it rose by more, other years it rose by 
less, and in still other years it fell. The growth rate of 1.80 percent per year ignores 
short-run fluctuations around the long-run trend and represents an average rate 
of growth for real income per person over many years. 
The countries in Table 1 are ordered by their growth rate from the most to the 
least rapid. Here you can see the large variety in growth experiences. High on 
the list are Brazil and China, which went from being among the poorest nations 
in the world to being among middle-income nations. Also high on the list is 
Japan, which went from being a middle-income nation to being among the richest 
Near the bottom of the list you can find Pakistan and Bangladesh, which 
were among the poorest nations at the end of the nineteenth century and remain 
so today. At the bottom of the list is the United Kingdom. In 1870, the United 
Kingdom was the richest country in the worl
--- PAGE 547 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
These data show that the world’s richest countries have no guarantee they will 
stay the richest and that the world’s poorest countries are not doomed to remain 
forever in poverty. But what explains these changes over time? Why do some 
countries zoom ahead while others lag behind? These are precisely the questions 
What has been the approximate long-run growth rate of real GDP per person 
in the United States? Name a country that has had faster growth and a 
country that has had slower growth.
Are You Richer Than the Richest American?
merican Heritage magazine once published a list of the richest 
Americans of all time. The number 1 spot went to John D. 
Rockefeller, the oil entrepreneur who lived from 1839 to 1937. According 
to the magazine’s calculations, his wealth would today be the equivalent 
of about $200 billion, almost three times that of Bill Gates, the software 
entrepreneur who is today’s richest American.
Despite his great wealth, Rockefeller did not enjoy many of the 
conveniences that we now take for granted. He couldn’t watch television, 
play video games, surf the Internet, or send e-mail. During the heat of 
summer, he couldn’t cool his home 
with air-conditioning. For much of his 
life, he couldn’t travel by car or plane, 
and he couldn’t use a telephone to 
call friends or family. If he became ill, 
he couldn’t take advantage of many 
medicines, such as antibiotics, that 
doctors today routinely use to prolong 
--- PAGE 548 ---
CHAPTER 25   PRODUCTION AND GROWTH
catches his own fish, grows his own vegetables, and makes his own clothes. 
We can think of Crusoe’s activities—his production and consumption of 
fish, vegetables, and clothing—as a simple economy. By examining Crusoe’s 
economy, we can learn some lessons that also apply to more complex and 
What determines Crusoe’s standard of living? In a word, productivity, the 
quantity of goods and services produced from each unit of labor input. If Crusoe 
is good at catching fish, growing vegetables, and making clothes, he lives well. If 
he is bad at doing these things, he lives poorly. Because Crusoe gets to consume 
only what he produces, his living standard is tied to his productivity.
In the case of Crusoe’s economy, it is easy to see that productivity is the key 
determinant of living standards and that growth in productivity is the key 
determinant of growth in living standards. The more fish Crusoe can catch per 
hour, the more he eats at dinner. If Crusoe finds a better place to catch fish, his 
productivity rises. This increase in productivity makes Crusoe better off: He 
can eat the extra fish, or he can spend less time fishing and devote more time to 
making other goods he enjoys.
Productivity’s key role in determining living standards is as true for nations 
as it is for stranded sailors. Recall that an economy’s GDP measures two things 
at once: the total income earned by everyone in the economy and the total 
expenditure on the economy
--- PAGE 549 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
A Picture Is Worth a Thousand Statistics
eorge Bernard Shaw once said, “It is the mark of a truly intelligent 
person to be moved by statistics.” Most of us, however, have trouble 
being moved by data on GDP—until we see with our own eyes what 
these statistics represent. 
The three photos on these pages show a typical family from each of 
three countries—the United Kingdom, Mexico, and Mali. Each family was 
photographed outside their home, together with all their material possessions. 
These nations have very different standards of living, as judged by 
these photos, GDP, or other statistics. 
• The United Kingdom is an advanced economy. In 2014, its income per 
person was $39,040. A baby born in the United Kingdom can expect 
a relatively healthy childhood: Only 4 out of 1,000 children die before 
reaching age 5. Almost the entire population has access to modern 
sanitation facilities, such as a bathroom and sewer system, to safely 
remove human waste. Educational attainment is high: Among indi-
viduals of college age, 60 percent are enrolled in higher education. 
before age 5. About 85 percent 
have access to modern sanitation. Among those of college age, 30 
• Mali is a poor country. In 2014, its income per person was only 
$1,510. Life is often cut short: 115 out of 1,000 children die before 
age 5. Only 25 percent of the population has access to modern san-
itation. And educational attainment in Mali is low: Among those of 
co
--- PAGE 550 ---
CHAPTER 25   PRODUCTION AND GROWTH
A Typical Family in Mexico
PETER MENZEL/MENZELPHOTO.COM
PETER MENZEL/MENZELPHOTO.COM
--- PAGE 551 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
when woodworkers make furniture, they use saws, lathes, and drill presses. 
More tools allow the woodworkers to produce their output more quickly and 
more accurately: A worker with only basic hand tools can make less furniture 
each week than a worker with sophisticated and specialized woodworking 
As you may recall, the inputs used to produce goods and services—labor, 
capital, and so on—are called the factors of production. An important feature of 
capital is that it is a produced factor of production. That is, capital is an input 
into the production process that in the past was an output from the production 
process. The woodworker uses a lathe to make the leg of a table. Earlier, the lathe 
itself was the output of a firm that manufactures lathes. The lathe manufacturer 
in turn used other equipment to make its product. Thus, capital is a factor of 
production used to produce all kinds of goods and services, including more 
Human Capital per Worker  A second determinant of productivity is human 
capital. Human capital is the economist’s term for the knowledge and skills that 
workers acquire through education, training, and experience. Human capital 
includes the skills accumulated in early childhood programs, grade school, high 
school, college, and on-the-job training for adults in the labor force. 
Education, training, and experience are less tangible than lathes, bulldozers, 
and buildings, but human capital is similar to p
--- PAGE 552 ---
CHAPTER 25   PRODUCTION AND GROWTH
Technological Knowledge  A fourth determinant of productivity is technological 
knowledge—the understanding of the best ways to produce goods and services. 
A hundred years ago, most Americans worked on farms because farm technology 
required a high input of labor to feed the entire population. Today, thanks to 
advances in farming technology, a small fraction of the population can produce 
enough food to feed the entire country. This technological change made labor 
available to produce other goods and services.
Technological knowledge takes many forms. Some technology is common 
knowledge—after one person uses it, everyone becomes aware of it. For example, 
once Henry Ford successfully introduced assembly-line production, other 
carmakers quickly followed suit. Other technology is proprietary—it is known 
only by the company that discovers it. Only the Coca-Cola Company, for instance, 
knows the secret recipe for making its famous soft drink. Still other technology is 
proprietary for a short time. When a pharmaceutical company discovers a new 
drug, the patent system gives that company a temporary right to be its exclusive 
manufacturer. When the patent expires, however, other companies are allowed to 
make the drug. All these forms of technological knowledge are important for the 
economy’s production of goods and services.
It is worthwhile to distinguish between technological knowledge and human 
capital. Although they are closely relat
--- PAGE 553 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
Technological knowledge refers to society’s understanding about how the 
world works. Human capital refers to the resources expended transmitting this 
understanding to the labor force. To use a relevant metaphor, technological 
knowledge is the quality of society’s textbooks, whereas human capital is the 
amount of time that the population has devoted to reading them. Workers’ 
productivity depends on both.
ARE NATURAL RESOURCES A LIMIT TO GROWTH?
Today, the world’s population is over 7 billion, more than four 
times what it was a century ago. At the same time, many people 
are enjoying a much higher standard of living than did their great-
grandparents. A perennial debate concerns whether this growth in 
population and living standards can continue in the future.
Many commentators have argued that natural resources will eventually limit 
how much the world’s economies can grow. At first, this argument might seem 
hard to ignore. If the world has only a fixed supply of nonrenewable natural 
resources, how can population, production, and living standards continue to grow 
over time? Eventually, won’t supplies of oil and minerals start to run out? When 
these shortages start to occur, won’t they stop economic growth and, perhaps, even 
force living standards to fall? 
Despite the apparent appeal of such arguments, most economists are less 
concerned about such limits to growth than one might guess. They argue that 
technological progr
--- PAGE 554 ---
CHAPTER 25   PRODUCTION AND GROWTH
25-3 Economic Growth and Public Policy
So far, we have determined that a society’s standard of living depends on its 
ability to produce goods and services and that its productivity in turn depends 
on physical capital per worker, human capital per worker, natural resources 
per worker, and technological knowledge. Let’s now turn to the question faced 
by policymakers around the world: What can government policy do to raise 
productivity and living standards?
25-3a Saving and Investment
Because capital is a produced factor of production, a society can change the 
amount of capital it has. If today the economy produces a large quantity of new 
capital goods, then tomorrow it will have a larger stock of capital and be able to 
produce more goods and services. Thus, one way to raise future productivity is to 
invest more current resources in the production of capital.
One of the Ten Principles of Economics presented in Chapter 1 is that people 
face trade-offs. This principle is especially important when considering the 
accumulation of capital. Because resources are scarce, devoting more resources 
to producing capital requires devoting fewer resources to producing goods and 
services for current consumption. That is, for society to invest more in capital, it 
must consume less and save more of its current income. The growth that arises 
from capital accumulation is not a free lunch: It requires that society sacrifice 
consumption of goods and
--- PAGE 555 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
so growth slows down. In the long run, the higher saving rate leads to a higher level of 
productivity and income but not to higher growth in these variables. Reaching this long 
run, however, can take quite a while. According to studies of international data 
on economic growth, increasing the saving rate can lead to substantially higher 
growth for a period of several decades.
The property of diminishing returns to capital has another important 
implication: Other things being equal, it is easier for a country to grow fast if it 
starts out relatively poor. This effect of initial conditions on subsequent growth 
is sometimes called the catch-up effect. In poor countries, workers lack even 
the most rudimentary tools and, as a result, have low productivity. Thus, small 
amounts of capital investment can substantially raise these workers’ productivity. 
By contrast, workers in rich countries have large amounts of capital with which 
to work, and this partly explains their high productivity. Yet with the amount of 
capital per worker already so high, additional capital investment has a relatively 
small effect on productivity. Studies of international data on economic growth 
confirm this catch-up effect: Controlling for other variables, such as the percentage 
of GDP devoted to investment, poor countries tend to grow at faster rates than 
This catch-up effect can help explain some otherwise puzzling facts. Here’s an 
example: From 19
--- PAGE 556 ---
CHAPTER 25   PRODUCTION AND GROWTH
This catch-up effect shows up in other aspects of life. When a school gives an 
end-of-year award to the “Most Improved” student, that student is usually one 
who began the year with relatively poor performance. Students who began the 
year not studying find improvement easier than students who always worked 
hard. Note that it is good to be “Most Improved,” given the starting point, but it is 
even better to be “Best Student.” Similarly, economic growth over the last several 
decades has been much more rapid in South Korea than in the United States, but 
GDP per person is still higher in the United States.
25-3c Investment from Abroad
So far, we have discussed how policies aimed at increasing a country’s saving rate 
can increase investment and, thereby, long-term economic growth. Yet saving by 
domestic residents is not the only way for a country to invest in new capital. The 
other way is investment by foreigners. 
Investment from abroad takes several forms. Ford Motor Company might 
build a car factory in Mexico. A capital investment that is owned and operated by 
a foreign entity is called foreign direct investment. Alternatively, an American might 
buy stock in a Mexican corporation (that is, buy a share in the ownership of the 
corporation), and the corporation can use the proceeds from the stock sale to build 
a new factory. An investment that is financed with foreign money but operated by 
domestic residents is called foreign portfo
--- PAGE 557 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
the funds might best be used. The World Bank and its sister organization, the 
International Monetary Fund, were set up after World War II. One lesson from 
the war was that economic distress often leads to political turmoil, international 
tensions, and military conflict. Thus, every country has an interest in promoting 
economic prosperity around the world. The World Bank and the International 
Monetary Fund were established to achieve that common goal.
Education—investment in human capital—is at least as important as investment 
in physical capital for a country’s long-run economic success. In the United States, 
each year of schooling has historically raised a person’s wage by an average of 
about 10 percent. In less developed countries, where human capital is especially 
scarce, the gap between the wages of educated and uneducated workers is even 
larger. Thus, one way government policy can enhance the standard of living is to 
provide good schools and to encourage the population to take advantage of them.
Investment in human capital, like investment in physical capital, has an 
opportunity cost. When students are in school, they forgo the wages they could 
have earned as members of the labor force. In less developed countries, children 
often drop out of school at an early age, even though the benefit of additional 
schooling is very high, simply because their labor is needed to help support the 
Some economists have argued tha
--- PAGE 558 ---
CHAPTER 25   PRODUCTION AND GROWTH
work, insufficient caloric intake substantially reduced the work effort they could 
put forth. As nutrition improved, so did workers’ productivity.
Fogel studied these historical trends in part by looking at the height of 
the population. Short stature can be an indicator of malnutrition, especially 
during gestation and the early years of life. Fogel found that as nations develop 
economically, people eat more and the population gets taller. From 1775 to 1975, 
the average caloric intake in Great Britain rose by 26 percent and the height of the 
average man rose by 3.6 inches. Similarly, during the spectacular economic growth 
in South Korea from 1962 to 1995, caloric consumption rose by 44 percent and 
average male height rose by 2 inches. Of course, a person’s height is determined 
by a combination of genetics and environment. But because the genetic makeup 
of a population is slow to change, such increases in average height are most likely 
due to changes in the environment—nutrition being the obvious explanation.
Moreover, studies have found that height is an indicator of productivity. 
Looking at data on a large number of workers at a point in time, researchers have 
found that taller workers tend to earn more. Because wages reflect a worker’s 
productivity, this finding suggests that taller workers tend to be more productive. 
The effect of height on wages is especially pronounced in poorer countries, where 
malnutrition is a bigger r
--- PAGE 559 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
through market prices. That is, market prices are the instrument with which the 
invisible hand of the marketplace brings supply and demand into balance in each 
of the many thousands of markets that make up the economy.
An important prerequisite for the price system to work is an economy-wide 
respect for property rights. Property rights refer to the ability of people to exercise 
authority over the resources they own. A mining company will not make the 
effort to mine iron ore if it expects the ore to be stolen. The company mines the 
ore only if it is confident that it will benefit from the ore’s subsequent sale. For 
this reason, courts serve an important role in a market economy: They enforce 
property rights. Through the criminal justice system, the courts discourage theft. 
In addition, through the civil justice system, the courts ensure that buyers and 
sellers live up to their contracts.
Those of us in developed countries tend to take property rights for granted, 
but those living in less developed countries understand that a lack of property 
rights can be a major problem. In many countries, the system of justice does not 
work well. Contracts are hard to enforce, and fraud often goes unpunished. In 
more extreme cases, the government not only fails to enforce property rights but 
actually infringes upon them. To do business in some countries, firms are expected 
to bribe government officials. Such corruption impedes the co
--- PAGE 560 ---
CHAPTER 25   PRODUCTION AND GROWTH
for instance, is about that of Houston, Texas. Imagine what would happen if the 
Houston city council were to prohibit city residents from trading with people 
living outside the city limits. Without being able to take advantage of the gains 
from trade, Houston would need to produce all the goods it consumes. It would 
also have to produce all its own capital goods, rather than importing state-of-
the-art equipment from other cities. Living standards in Houston would fall 
immediately, and the problem would likely only get worse over time. This is 
precisely what happened when Argentina pursued inward-oriented policies 
throughout much of the 20th century. In contrast, countries that pursued outward-
oriented policies, such as South Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan, enjoyed high rates 
The amount that a nation trades with others is determined not only by government 
policy but also by geography. Countries with natural seaports find trade easier than 
countries without this resource. It is not a coincidence that many of the world’s major 
cities, such as New York, San Francisco, and Hong Kong, are located next to oceans. 
Similarly, because landlocked countries find international trade more difficult, they 
tend to have lower levels of income than countries with easy access to the world’s 
waterways. For example, countries with more than 80 percent of their population 
living within 100 kilometers of a coast have an average GDP per person about 
--- PAGE 561 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
When economists look ahead to future tech-
nological progress, their crystal ball is often 
Has All the Important Stuff  
obert Gordon, a curmudgeonly 73-year-old 
economist, believes our best days are over. 
After a century of life-changing innovations 
that spurred growth, he says, human progress 
Joel Mokyr, a cheerful 67-year-old 
economist, imagines a coming age of new 
inventions, including gene therapies to prolong 
our life span and miracle seeds that can feed 
the world without fertilizers.
These big-name colleagues at 
Northwestern University represent opposite 
poles in the debate over the future of the 21st 
century economy: rapid innovation driven 
by robotic manufacturing, 3-D printing and 
cloud computing, versus years of job losses, 
stagnant wages and rising income inequality.
The divergent views are more than 
academic. For many Americans, the recession 
left behind the scars of lost jobs, lower wages 
and depressed home prices. The question is 
whether tough times are here for good. The 
answer depends on who you ask. 
“I think the rate of innovation is just 
getting faster and faster,” Mr. Mokyr said over 
noodles and spicy chicken at a Thai restaurant 
near the campus where he and Mr. Gordon have 
“What’s the evidence of that?” snapped 
Mr. Gordon. “There isn’t any.”
The men get along fine when talk is limited 
to, say, faculty gossip. About the future, 
though, they bicker constantly. When Mr. Mokyr 
described l
--- PAGE 562 ---
CHAPTER 25   PRODUCTION AND GROWTH
wisdom. His parents and a brother were Ph.D. 
economists. His father, an expert on business 
cycles, taught at the University of California, 
If anything, his family should have made 
him an optimist. Mr. Gordon’s father grew 
up grindingly poor, at one point supporting 
three younger brothers after his own father 
died; his eventual success mirrored the larger 
transformation of the U.S. into the world’s 
“His generation saw the move from 
crowded tenements in the 1920s to suburbia 
in the 1950s—with everyone having a yard 
and a car,” Mr. Gordon said, a leap showing 
how much progress has since slowed. 
Mr. Gordon sees a hobbled U.S. economy 
ahead. Americans are getting older, leaving 
too few workers to support the aging 
population. The problem is even worse in 
An aging citizenry is among a list of 
troubles, including the declining share of 
working-age men with jobs; stagnant rates 
of Americans earning college degrees; jobs 
lost abroad and high government debt. The 
biggest obstacle, he said, is growing income 
To compensate, Mr. Gordon said, 
economies need technological advances. The 
problem is that the biggest breakthroughs—
like electrification or the discovery of 
antibiotics—are behind us. Electricity 
changed how people lived and worked, and 
it spawned hundreds of new industries. 
The technology that allowed people to 
communicate instantly or travel quickly over 
long distances were 19th- and 20th-century 
More recent inv
--- PAGE 563 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
the government awards the patent, which gives the inventor the exclusive right 
to make the product for a specified number of years. In essence, the patent gives 
the inventor a property right over her invention, turning her new idea from a 
public good into a private good. By allowing inventors to profit from their 
inventions—even if only temporarily—the patent system enhances the incentive 
Economists and other social scientists have long debated how population affects 
a society. The most direct effect is on the size of the labor force: A large population 
means more workers to produce goods and services. The tremendous size of the 
Chinese population is one reason China is such an important player in the world 
At the same time, however, a large population means more people to consume 
those goods and services. So while a large population means a larger total output 
of goods and services, it need not mean a higher standard of living for the typical 
citizen. Indeed, both large and small nations are found at all levels of economic 
Beyond these obvious effects of population size, population growth interacts with 
the other factors of production in ways that are more subtle and open to debate.
Stretching Natural Resources  Thomas Robert Malthus (1766–1834), an English 
minister and early economic thinker, is famous for his book called An Essay on 
the Principle of Population as It Affects the Future Improvement of Society. In it,
--- PAGE 564 ---
CHAPTER 25   PRODUCTION AND GROWTH
growth emphasize its effects on capital accumulation. According to these theories, 
high population growth reduces GDP per worker because rapid growth in the 
number of workers forces the capital stock to be spread more thinly. In other 
words, when population growth is rapid, each worker is equipped with less 
capital. A smaller quantity of capital per worker leads to lower productivity and 
This problem is most apparent in the case of human capital. Countries with 
high population growth have large numbers of school-age children. This places 
a larger burden on the educational system. It is not surprising, therefore, that 
educational attainment tends to be low in countries with high population growth.
The differences in population growth around the world are large. In developed 
countries, such as the United States and those in Western Europe, the population 
has risen only about 1 percent per year in recent decades and is expected to rise 
even more slowly in the future. By contrast, in many poor African countries, 
population grows at about 3 percent per year. At this rate, the population doubles 
every 23 years. This rapid population growth makes it harder to provide workers 
with the tools and skills they need to achieve high levels of productivity.
Rapid population growth is not the main reason that less developed countries 
are poor, but some analysts believe that reducing the rate of population growth 
would help these countries ra
--- PAGE 565 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
Kremer’s second piece of evidence comes from comparing regions of the 
world. The melting of the polar icecaps at the end of the Ice Age around 10,000 b.c. 
flooded the land bridges and separated the world into several distinct regions that 
could not communicate with one another for thousands of years. If technological 
progress is more rapid when there are more people to discover things, then larger 
regions should have experienced more rapid growth.
According to Kremer, that is exactly what happened. The most successful 
region of the world in 1500 (when Columbus reestablished contact) comprised the 
“Old World” civilizations of the large Eurasia-Africa region. Next in technological 
development were the Aztec and Mayan civilizations in the Americas, followed 
by the hunter-gatherers of Australia, and then the primitive people of Tasmania, 
who lacked even fire-making and most stone and bone tools. 
To figure out what policies work in 
developing nations, economists are 
increasingly turning to randomized 
What It Takes to Lift Families 
ighteen years ago, Dean Karlan was a fresh, 
bright-eyed graduate student in economics 
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
He wanted to answer what seemed like a sim-
“Does global aid work?” Karlan says.
He was reading a bunch of studies on the 
topic. But none of them actually answered the 
question. “We were tearing our hair out reading 
these papers because it was frustrating,” he 

--- PAGE 566 ---
CHAPTER 25   PRODUCTION AND GROWTH
The smallest isolated region was Flinders Island, a tiny island between 
Tasmania and Australia. With the smallest population, Flinders Island had the 
fewest opportunities for technological advance and, indeed, seemed to regress. 
Around 3000 b.c., human society on Flinders Island died out completely. 
A large population, Kremer concluded, is a prerequisite for technological 
Describe three ways a government policymaker can try to raise the growth 
in living standards in a society. Are there any drawbacks to these policies?
They teamed up with a network of 
researchers and nonprofits in six developing 
countries. They went to thousands of 
communities and found the poorest families.
Then they divided the families into two 
groups. They gave half the families nothing. 
And the other half a whole smorgasbord of aid 
for one to two years. They gave them:
1.  Some livestock for making money, 
such as goats for milk, bees for honey, 
or guinea pigs for selling. “Depending 
on the site, there were different things 
specifically appropriate for that con-
2.  Training about how to raise the 
3.  Food or cash so they wouldn’t eat the 
5.  Help with their health—both physical 
Karlan and his colleagues reported the 
results of the massive experiment in the 
journal Science this week.
So what did they find? Well, the strategy 
worked pretty well in five of the six countries 
they tried it in. Families who got the aid 
started making a little more mone
--- PAGE 567 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
25-4  Conclusion: The Importance of Long-Run Growth
1. Over the past century, real GDP per person in the 
United States has grown about _____ percent per 
year, which means it doubles about every _____ years.
2. The world’s rich countries, such as the United States 
and Germany, have income per person that is about 
_____ times the income per person in the world’s poor 
countries, such as Pakistan and India.
3. Most economists are ________ that natural resources 
will eventually limit economic growth. As evidence, 
they note that the prices of most natural resources, 
adjusted for overall inflation, have tended to ________ 
4. Because capital is subject to diminishing returns, 
higher saving and investment do not lead to higher
a. income in the long run.
b. income in the short run.
c. growth in the long run.
d. growth in the short run.
5. When the Japanese car maker Toyota expands one 
of its car factories in the United States, what is the 
likely impact of this event on the gross domestic prod-
uct and gross national product of the United States?
a. GDP rises and GNP falls.
b. GNP rises and GDP falls.
c. GDP shows a larger increase than GNP.
d. GNP shows a larger increase than GDP.
6. Thomas Robert Malthus believed that population 
a. put stress on the economy’s ability to produce 
food, dooming humans to remain in poverty.
b. spread the capital stock too thinly across the labor 
force, lowering each worker’s productivity.
c. promot
--- PAGE 568 ---
CHAPTER 25   PRODUCTION AND GROWTH
• Economic prosperity, as measured by GDP per person, 
varies substantially around the world. The average 
income in the world’s richest countries is more than 
ten times that in the world’s poorest countries. Because 
growth rates of real GDP also vary substantially, the 
relative positions of countries can change dramatically 
• The standard of living in an economy depends on 
the economy’s ability to produce goods and services. 
Productivity, in turn, depends on the physical capital, 
human capital, natural resources, and technological 
knowledge available to workers.
• Government policies can try to influence the 
economy’s growth rate in many ways: by encouraging 
saving and investment, encouraging investment from 
abroad, fostering education, promoting good health, 
maintaining property rights and political stability, 
allowing free trade, and promoting the research and 
development of new technologies.
• The accumulation of capital is subject to diminishing 
returns: The more capital an economy has, the less 
additional output the economy gets from an extra unit 
of capital. As a result, although higher saving leads to 
higher growth for a period of time, growth eventually 
slows down as capital, productivity, and income rise. 
Also because of diminishing returns, the return to 
capital is especially high in poor countries. Other 
things being equal, these countries can grow faster 
because of the catch-up effect. 
• Population growth
--- PAGE 569 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
1. Most countries, including the United States, import 
substantial amounts of goods and services from other 
countries. Yet the chapter says that a nation can enjoy 
a high standard of living only if it can produce a 
large quantity of goods and services itself. Can you 
reconcile these two facts?
2. Suppose that society decided to reduce consumption 
a. How would this change affect economic growth?
b. What groups in society would benefit from this 
change? What groups might be hurt?
3. Societies choose what share of their resources to 
devote to consumption and what share to devote to 
investment. Some of these decisions involve private 
spending; others involve government spending.
a. Describe some forms of private spending that 
represent consumption and some forms that 
represent investment. The national income 
accounts include tuition as a part of consumer 
spending. In your opinion, are the resources you 
devote to your education a form of consumption 
b. Describe some forms of government spending 
that represent consumption and some forms that 
represent investment. In your opinion, should we 
view government spending on health programs 
as a form of consumption or investment? Would 
you distinguish between health programs for the 
young and health programs for the elderly?
4. What is the opportunity cost of investing in capital? 
Do you think a country can overinvest in capital? 
What is the opportunity cost of investing in
--- PAGE 570 ---
Saving, Investment, and the 
magine that you have just graduated from college (with a degree in economics, 
of course) and you decide to start your own business—an economic forecasting 
firm. Before you make any money selling your forecasts, you have to incur 
substantial costs to set up your business. You have to buy computers with which 
to make your forecasts, as well as desks, chairs, and filing cabinets to furnish 
your new office. Each of these items is a type of capital that your firm will use to 
produce and sell its services. 
How do you obtain the funds to invest in these capital goods? Perhaps you 
are able to pay for them out of your past savings. More likely, however, like 
most entrepreneurs, you do not have enough money of your own 
