--- PAGE 570 ---
Saving, Investment, and the 
magine that you have just graduated from college (with a degree in economics, 
of course) and you decide to start your own business—an economic forecasting 
firm. Before you make any money selling your forecasts, you have to incur 
substantial costs to set up your business. You have to buy computers with which 
to make your forecasts, as well as desks, chairs, and filing cabinets to furnish 
your new office. Each of these items is a type of capital that your firm will use to 
produce and sell its services. 
How do you obtain the funds to invest in these capital goods? Perhaps you 
are able to pay for them out of your past savings. More likely, however, like 
most entrepreneurs, you do not have enough money of your own 
--- PAGE 571 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
to finance the start of your business. As a result, you have to get the money you 
There are various ways to finance these capital investments. You could borrow 
the money, perhaps from a bank or from a friend or relative. In this case, you 
would promise not only to return the money to the lender at a later date but also 
to pay the lender interest for the use of the money. Alternatively, you could con-
vince someone to provide the money you need for your business in exchange for 
a share of your future profits, whatever they might happen to be. In either case, 
your investment in computers and office equipment is being financed by some-
The financial system consists of the institutions that help to match one per-
son’s saving with another person’s investment. As we discussed in the previous 
chapter, saving and investment are key ingredients to long-run economic growth: 
When a country saves a large portion of its GDP, more resources are available for 
investment in capital, and higher capital raises a country’s productivity and liv-
ing standard. The previous chapter, however, did not explain how the economy 
coordinates saving and investment. At any time, some people want to save some 
of their income for the future and others want to borrow to finance investments in 
new and growing businesses. What brings these two groups of people together? 
What ensures that the supply of funds from those who want to save balances the 
demand
--- PAGE 572 ---
CHAPTER 26   SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
The Bond Market  When Intel, the giant maker of computer chips, wants to borrow 
to finance construction of a new factory, it can borrow directly from the public. It 
does this by selling bonds. A bond is a certificate of indebtedness that specifies the 
obligations of the borrower to the holder of the bond. Put simply, a bond is an IOU. 
It identifies the time at which the loan will be repaid, called the date of maturity, and 
the rate of interest that will be paid periodically until the loan matures. The buyer of 
a bond gives his money to Intel in exchange for this promise of interest and eventual 
repayment of the amount borrowed (called the principal). The buyer can hold the 
bond until maturity, or he can sell the bond at an earlier date to someone else.
There are millions of different bonds in the U.S. economy. When large 
corporations, the federal government, or state and local governments need to 
borrow to finance the purchase of a new factory, a new jet fighter, or a new school, 
they usually do so by issuing bonds. If you look at The Wall Street Journal or the 
business section of your local newspaper, you will find a listing of the prices and 
interest rates on some of the most important bond issues. These bonds differ 
according to three significant characteristics. 
The first characteristic is a bond’s term—the length of time until the bond 
matures. Some bonds have short terms, such as a few months, whi
--- PAGE 573 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
The sale of stock to raise money is called equity finance, whereas the sale of bonds 
is called debt finance. Although corporations use both equity and debt finance to 
raise money for new investments, stocks and bonds are very different. The owner 
of shares of Intel stock is a part owner of Intel, while the owner of an Intel bond 
is a creditor of the corporation. If Intel is very profitable, the stockholders enjoy 
the benefits of these profits, whereas the bondholders get only the interest on their 
bonds. And if Intel runs into financial difficulty, the bondholders are paid what 
they are due before stockholders receive anything at all. Compared to bonds, 
stocks offer the holder both higher risk and potentially higher return.
After a corporation issues stock by selling shares to the public, these shares 
trade among stockholders on organized stock exchanges. In these transactions, 
the corporation itself receives no money when its stock changes hands. The most 
important stock exchanges in the U.S. economy are the New York Stock Exchange 
and the NASDAQ (National Association of Securities Dealers Automated 
Quotations). Most of the world’s countries have their own stock exchanges on 
which the shares of local companies trade. 
The prices at which shares trade on stock exchanges are determined by the 
supply of and demand for the stock in these companies. Because stock represents 
ownership in a corporation, the demand for a sto
--- PAGE 574 ---
CHAPTER 26   SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
Besides being financial intermediaries, banks play another important role in the 
economy: They facilitate purchases of goods and services by allowing people to 
write checks against their deposits and to access those deposits with debit cards. 
In other words, banks help create a special asset that people can use as a medium 
in transactions. A bank’s role in providing a medium of exchange distinguishes it 
from many other financial institutions. Stocks and bonds, like bank deposits, are a 
possible store of value for the wealth that people have accumulated in past saving, 
but access to this wealth is not as easy, cheap, and immediate as just writing a 
check or swiping a debit card. For now, we ignore this second role of banks, but 
we will return to it when we discuss the monetary system later in the book.
Mutual Funds  A financial intermediary of increasing importance in the U.S. 
economy is the mutual fund. A mutual fund is an institution that sells shares to the 
public and uses the proceeds to buy a selection, or portfolio, of various types of stocks, 
bonds, or both stocks and bonds. The shareholder of the mutual fund accepts all the 
risk and return associated with the portfolio. If the value of the portfolio rises, the 
shareholder benefits; if the value of the portfolio falls, the shareholder suffers the loss. 
The primary advantage of mutual funds is that they allow people with small 
amounts of money to d
--- PAGE 575 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
value of any single stock or bond is tied to the fortunes of one company, holding a 
single kind of stock or bond is very risky. By contrast, people who hold a diverse 
portfolio of stocks and bonds face less risk because they have only a small stake 
in each company. Mutual funds make this diversification easy. With only a few 
hundred dollars, a person can buy shares in a mutual fund and, indirectly, become 
the part owner or creditor of hundreds of major companies. For this service, the 
company operating the mutual fund charges shareholders a fee, usually between 
0.25 and 2.0 percent of assets each year.
A second advantage claimed by mutual fund companies is that mutual funds 
give ordinary people access to the skills of professional money managers. The 
managers of most mutual funds pay close attention to the developments and 
prospects of the companies in which they buy stock. These managers buy the 
stock of companies they view as having a profitable future and sell the stock 
of companies with less promising prospects. This professional management, it 
is argued, should increase the return that mutual fund depositors earn on their 
Financial economists, however, are often skeptical of this argument. With 
thousands of money managers paying close attention to each company’s 
prospects, the price of a company’s stock is usually a good reflection of the 
company’s true value. As a result, it is hard to “beat the market” by buyi
--- PAGE 576 ---
CHAPTER 26   SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
26-2  Saving and Investment in the National 
Events that occur within the financial system are central to understanding 
developments in the overall economy. As we have just seen, the institutions that 
make up this system—the bond market, the stock market, banks, and mutual 
funds—have the role of coordinating the economy’s saving and investment. 
And as we saw in the previous chapter, saving and investment are important 
determinants of long-run growth in GDP and living standards. As a result, 
macroeconomists need to understand how financial markets work and how 
various events and policies affect them.
As a starting point for analyzing financial markets, we discuss the key 
macroeconomic variables that measure activity in these markets. Our emphasis 
here is not on behavior but on accounting. Accounting refers to how various 
numbers are defined and added up. A personal accountant might help an 
individual add up his income and expenses. A national income accountant does 
the same thing for the economy as a whole. The national income accounts include, 
in particular, GDP and the many related statistics.
The rules of national income accounting include several important identities. 
Recall that an identity is an equation that must be true because of the way the 
variables in the equation are defined. Identities are useful to keep in mind, for they 
clarify how different variables are related to one another. Here we c
--- PAGE 577 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
This equation states that GDP is the sum of consumption, investment, and 
government purchases. Each unit of output sold in a closed economy is consumed, 
invested, or bought by the government.
To see what this identity can tell us about financial markets, subtract C and G 
from both sides of this equation. We then obtain
The left side of this equation (Y 2 C 2 G) is the total income in the economy that 
remains after paying for consumption and government purchases: This amount is 
called national saving, or just saving, and is denoted S. Substituting S for Y − C − G, 
we can write the last equation as 
This equation states that saving equals investment.
To understand the meaning of national saving, it is helpful to manipulate the 
definition a bit more. Let T denote the amount that the government collects from 
households in taxes minus the amount it pays back to households in the form 
of transfer payments (such as Social Security and welfare). We can then write 
national saving in either of two ways:
S 5 (Y 2 T 2 C) 1 (T 2 G).
These equations are the same because the two T’s in the second equation cancel 
each other, but each reveals a different way of thinking about national saving. In 
particular, the second equation separates national saving into two pieces: private 
saving (Y 2 T 2 C) and public saving (T 2 G). 
Consider each of these two pieces. Private saving is the amount of income that 
households have left after paying th
--- PAGE 578 ---
CHAPTER 26   SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
26-2b The Meaning of Saving and Investment
The terms saving and investment can sometimes be confusing. Most people 
use these terms casually and sometimes interchangeably. By contrast, the 
macroeconomists who put together the national income accounts use these terms 
Consider an example. Suppose that Larry earns more than he spends and 
deposits his unspent income in a bank or uses it to buy some stock or a bond 
from a corporation. Because Larry’s income exceeds his consumption, he adds to 
the nation’s saving. Larry might think of himself as “investing” his money, but a 
macroeconomist would call Larry’s act saving rather than investment.
In the language of macroeconomics, investment refers to the purchase of new 
capital, such as equipment or buildings. When Moe borrows from the bank to 
build himself a new house, he adds to the nation’s investment. (Remember, the 
purchase of a new house is the one form of household spending that is investment 
rather than consumption.) Similarly, when the Curly Corporation sells some 
stock and uses the proceeds to build a new factory, it also adds to the nation’s 
Although the accounting identity S = I shows that saving and investment are 
equal for the economy as a whole, this does not have to be true for every individual 
household or firm. Larry’s saving can be greater than his investment, and he can 
deposit the excess in a bank. Moe’s saving can be less than his investment,
--- PAGE 579 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
26-3a Supply and Demand for Loanable Funds
The economy’s market for loanable funds, like other markets in the economy, is 
governed by supply and demand. To understand how the market for loanable 
funds operates, therefore, we first look at the sources of supply and demand in 
The supply of loanable funds comes from people who have some extra income 
they want to save and lend out. This lending can occur directly, such as when 
a household buys a bond from a firm, or it can occur indirectly, such as when a 
household makes a deposit in a bank, which then uses the funds to make loans. In 
both cases, saving is the source of the supply of loanable funds.
The demand for loanable funds comes from households and firms who wish to 
borrow to make investments. This demand includes families taking out mortgages 
to buy new homes. It also includes firms borrowing to buy new equipment or 
build factories. In both cases, investment is the source of the demand for loanable funds.
The interest rate is the price of a loan. It represents the amount that borrowers 
pay for loans and the amount that lenders receive on their saving. Because a high 
interest rate makes borrowing more expensive, the quantity of loanable funds 
demanded falls as the interest rate rises. Similarly, because a high interest rate 
makes saving more attractive, the quantity of loanable funds supplied rises as the 
interest rate rises. In other words, the demand curve for loan
--- PAGE 580 ---
CHAPTER 26   SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
raise the interest rate they charge. A higher interest rate would encourage saving 
(thereby increasing the quantity of loanable funds supplied) and discourage 
borrowing for investment (thereby decreasing the quantity of loanable funds 
demanded). Conversely, if the interest rate were higher than the equilibrium level, 
the quantity of loanable funds supplied would exceed the quantity of loanable 
funds demanded. As lenders compete for the scarce borrowers, interest rates 
would be driven down. In this way, the interest rate approaches the equilibrium 
level at which the supply and demand for loanable funds exactly balance. 
Recall that economists distinguish between the real interest rate and the 
nominal interest rate. The nominal interest rate is the monetary return to saving 
and the monetary cost of borrowing. It is the interest rate as usually reported. The 
real interest rate is the nominal interest rate corrected for inflation; it equals the 
nominal interest rate minus the inflation rate. Because inflation erodes the value 
of money over time, the real interest rate more accurately reflects the real return 
to saving and the real cost of borrowing. Therefore, the supply and demand for 
loanable funds depend on the real (rather than nominal) interest rate, and the 
equilibrium in Figure 1 should be interpreted as determining the real interest rate 
in the economy. For the rest of this chapter, when you see the
--- PAGE 581 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
income, including interest and dividend income. To see the effects of this policy, 
consider a 25-year-old who saves $1,000 and buys a 30-year bond that pays an 
interest rate of 9 percent. In the absence of taxes, the $1,000 grows to $13,268 
when the individual reaches age 55. Yet if that interest is taxed at a rate of, say, 
33 percent, the after-tax interest rate is only 6 percent. In this case, the $1,000 grows 
to only $5,743 over the 30 years. The tax on interest income substantially reduces 
the future payoff from current saving and, as a result, reduces the incentive for 
In response to this problem, some economists and lawmakers have proposed 
reforming the tax code to encourage greater saving. For example, one proposal is 
to expand eligibility for special accounts, such as Individual Retirement Accounts, 
that allow people to shelter some of their saving from taxation. Let’s consider the 
effect of such a saving incentive on the market for loanable funds, as illustrated in 
Figure 2. We analyze this policy following our three steps.
First, which curve would this policy affect? Because the tax change would 
alter the incentive for households to save at any given interest rate, it would affect 
the quantity of loanable funds supplied at each interest rate. Thus, the supply of 
loanable funds would shift. The demand for loanable funds would remain the 
same because the tax change would not directly affect the amount that bor
--- PAGE 582 ---
CHAPTER 26   SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
equilibrium along the demand curve. With a lower cost of borrowing, households 
and firms are motivated to borrow more to finance greater investment. Thus, if a 
reform of the tax laws encouraged greater saving, the result would be lower interest rates 
This analysis of the effects of increased saving is widely accepted among 
economists, but there is less consensus about what kinds of tax changes should 
be enacted. Many economists endorse tax reform aimed at increasing saving to 
stimulate investment and growth. Yet others are skeptical that these tax changes 
would have much effect on national saving. These skeptics also doubt the equity 
of the proposed reforms. They argue that, in many cases, the benefits of the tax 
changes would accrue primarily to the wealthy, who are least in need of tax relief. 
26-3c Policy 2: Investment Incentives
Suppose that Congress passed a tax reform aimed at making investment more 
attractive. In essence, this is what Congress does when it institutes an investment 
tax credit, which it does from time to time. An investment tax credit gives a tax 
advantage to any firm building a new factory or buying a new piece of equipment. 
Let’s consider the effect of such a tax reform on the market for loanable funds, as 
First, would the law affect supply or demand? Because the tax credit would 
reward firms that borrow and invest in new capital, it would alter investment at 
any given interest 
--- PAGE 583 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
Third, consider how the equilibrium would change. In Figure 3, the increased 
demand for loanable funds raises the interest rate from 5 percent to 6 percent, and 
the higher interest rate in turn increases the quantity of loanable funds supplied 
from $1,200 billion to $1,400 billion, as households respond by increasing the 
amount they save. This change in household behavior is represented here as 
a movement along the supply curve. Thus, if a reform of the tax laws encouraged 
greater investment, the result would be higher interest rates and greater saving.
26-3d Policy 3: Government Budget Deficits and Surpluses
A perpetual topic of political debate is the status of the government budget. 
Recall that a budget deficit is an excess of government spending over tax revenue. 
Governments finance budget deficits by borrowing in the bond market, and 
the accumulation of past government borrowing is called the government debt. 
A budget surplus, an excess of tax revenue over government spending, can be used 
to repay some of the government debt. If government spending exactly equals tax 
revenue, the government is said to have a balanced budget.
Imagine that the government starts with a balanced budget and then, because 
of an increase in government spending, starts running a budget deficit. We can 
analyze the effects of the budget deficit by following our three steps in the market 
for loanable funds, as illustrated in Figure 4. 
First
--- PAGE 584 ---
CHAPTER 26   SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
the supply of loanable funds available to finance investment by households and 
firms. Thus, a budget deficit shifts the supply curve for loanable funds to the left 
from S1 to S2, as shown in Figure 4.
Third, we can compare the old and new equilibria. In the figure, when the 
budget deficit reduces the supply of loanable funds, the interest rate rises from 
5 percent to 6 percent. This higher interest rate then alters the behavior of the 
households and firms that participate in the loan market. In particular, many 
demanders of loanable funds are discouraged by the higher interest rate. Fewer 
families buy new homes, and fewer firms choose to build new factories. The fall 
in investment because of government borrowing is called crowding out and is 
represented in Figure 4 by the movement along the demand curve from a quantity 
of $1,200 billion in loanable funds to a quantity of $800 billion. That is, when the 
government borrows to finance its budget deficit, it crowds out private borrowers 
who are trying to finance investment.
Thus, the most basic lesson about budget deficits follows directly from their 
effects on the supply and demand for loanable funds: When the government reduces 
national saving by running a budget deficit, the interest rate rises and investment falls. 
Because investment is important for long-run economic growth, government 
budget deficits reduce the economy’s growth rate.
Why, you might as
--- PAGE 585 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
debt. This budget surplus, or public saving, contributes to national saving. 
Thus, a budget surplus increases the supply of loanable funds, reduces the interest 
rate, and stimulates investment. Higher investment, in turn, means greater capital 
accumulation and more rapid economic growth.
THE HISTORY OF U.S. GOVERNMENT DEBT
How indebted is the U.S. government? The answer to this question 
varies substantially over time. Figure 5 shows the debt of the U.S. 
federal government expressed as a percentage of U.S. GDP. It shows 
that the government debt has fluctuated from zero in 1836 to 107 
The behavior of the debt-to-GDP ratio is one gauge of what’s happening with the 
government’s finances. Because GDP is a rough measure of the government’s tax 
base, a declining debt-to-GDP ratio indicates that the government indebtedness is 
shrinking relative to its ability to raise tax revenue. This suggests that the government 
is, in some sense, living within its means. By contrast, a rising debt-to-GDP ratio 
means that the government indebtedness is increasing relative to its ability to raise 
tax revenue. It is often interpreted as meaning that fiscal policy—government 
spending and taxes—cannot be sustained forever at current levels.
The debt of the U.S. federal government, expressed here as a percentage of GDP, has 
varied throughout history. Wartime spending is typically associated with substantial 
increases in government debt. 
Source:
--- PAGE 586 ---
CHAPTER 26   SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
Throughout history, the primary cause of fluctuations in government debt 
has been war. When wars occur, government spending on national defense rises 
substantially to pay for soldiers and military equipment. Taxes sometimes rise 
as well but typically by much less than the increase in spending. The result is a 
budget deficit and increasing government debt. When the war is over, government 
spending declines and the debt-to-GDP ratio starts declining as well.
There are two reasons to believe that debt financing of war is an appropriate 
policy. First, it allows the government to keep tax rates smooth over time. Without 
debt financing, tax rates would have to rise sharply during wars, and this would 
cause a substantial decline in economic efficiency. Second, debt financing of wars 
shifts part of the cost of wars to future generations, who will have to pay off the 
government debt. This is arguably a fair distribution of the burden, for future 
generations get some of the benefit when one generation fights a war to defend the 
nation against foreign aggressors. 
One large increase in government debt that cannot be explained by war is the 
increase that occurred beginning around 1980. When President Ronald Reagan took 
office in 1981, he was committed to smaller government and lower taxes. Yet he 
found cutting government spending to be more difficult politically than cutting taxes. 
The result was the beginning of a
--- PAGE 587 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
n 2008 and 2009, the U.S. economy and many other major economies 
around the world experienced a financial crisis, which in turn led to 
a deep downturn in economic activity. We will examine these events 
in detail later in this book. But because this chapter introduces the 
financial system, let’s discuss briefly the key elements of financial 
The first element of a financial crisis is a large decline in some 
asset prices. In 2008 and 2009, that asset was real estate. The price of 
housing, after experiencing a boom earlier in the decade, fell by about 30 
percent over just a few years. Such a large decline in real estate prices 
had not been seen in the United States since the 1930s.
The second element of a financial crisis is widespread insolvencies 
at financial institutions. (A company is insolvent when its debts exceed 
the value of its assets.) In 2008 and 2009, many banks and other 
financial firms had in effect placed bets on real estate prices by holding 
mortgages backed by that real estate. When house prices fell, large 
numbers of homeowners stopped repaying their loans. These defaults 
pushed several major financial institutions toward bankruptcy.
The third element of a financial crisis is a decline in confidence 
in financial institutions. Although some deposits in banks are 
insured by government policies, not all are. As insolvencies mounted, 
every financial institution became a possible candidate for the next 
ban
--- PAGE 588 ---
CHAPTER 26   SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
into balance, they help allocate the economy’s scarce resources to their most 
In one way, however, financial markets are special. Financial markets, unlike 
most other markets, serve the important role of linking the present and the future. 
Those who supply loanable funds—savers—do so because they want to convert 
some of their current income into future purchasing power. Those who demand 
loanable funds—borrowers—do so because they want to invest today in order to 
have additional capital in the future to produce goods and services. Thus, well-
functioning financial markets are important not only for current generations but 
also for future generations who will inherit many of the resulting benefits. 
• The U.S. financial system is made up of many types 
of financial institutions, such as the bond market, 
the stock market, banks, and mutual funds. All these 
institutions act to direct the resources of households 
that want to save some of their income into the hands 
of households and firms that want to borrow.
• National income accounting identities reveal some 
important relationships among macroeconomic 
variables. In particular, for a closed economy, national 
saving must equal investment. Financial institutions 
are the mechanism through which the economy 
matches one person’s saving with another person’s 
• The interest rate is determined by the supply and 
demand for loanable funds. The supply of loanable 
f
--- PAGE 589 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
financial intermediaries, p. 544
national saving (saving), p. 548
market for loanable funds, p. 549
1. What is the role of the financial system? Name and 
describe two markets that are part of the financial 
system in the U.S. economy. Name and describe two 
2. Why is it important for people who own stocks and 
bonds to diversify their holdings? What type of 
financial institution makes diversification easier?
3. What is national saving? What is private saving? 
What is public saving? How are these three variables 
4. What is investment? How is it related to national 
saving in a closed economy?
5. Describe a change in the tax code that might increase 
private saving. If this policy were implemented, how 
would it affect the market for loanable funds?
6. What is a government budget deficit? How does it  
affect interest rates, investment, and economic 
some of their income and lend it out. The demand 
for loanable funds comes from households and firms 
that want to borrow for investment. To analyze how 
any policy or event affects the interest rate, one must 
consider how it affects the supply and demand for 
• National saving equals private saving plus public 
saving. A government budget deficit represents 
negative public saving and, therefore, reduces national 
saving and the supply of loanable funds available 
to finance investment. When a government budget 
deficit crowds out investment, it reduces the growth of 
1. For each of 
--- PAGE 590 ---
CHAPTER 26   SAVING, INVESTMENT, AND THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
4. Suppose GDP is $8 trillion, taxes are $1.5 trillion, 
private saving is $0.5 trillion, and public saving is  
$0.2 trillion. Assuming this economy is closed, 
calculate consumption, government purchases, 
national saving, and investment. 
5. Economists in Funlandia, a closed economy, have 
collected the following information about the 
economy for a particular year: 
 The economists also estimate that the investment 
 where r is the country’s real interest rate, expressed as 
a percentage. Calculate private saving, public saving, 
national saving, investment, and the equilibrium real 
6. Suppose that Intel is considering building a new chip-
a. Assuming that Intel needs to borrow money in the 
bond market, why would an increase in interest 
rates affect Intel’s decision about whether to build 
b. If Intel has enough of its own funds to finance 
the new factory without borrowing, would an 
increase in interest rates still affect Intel’s decision 
about whether to build the factory? Explain.
7. Three students have each saved $1,000. Each has 
an investment opportunity in which he or she can 
invest up to $2,000. Here are the rates of return on the 
students’ investment projects:
a. If borrowing and lending are prohibited, so each 
student uses only personal saving to finance his or 
her own investment project, how much will each 
student have a year later when the project pays its 
b. Now suppose their school opens up
--- PAGE 591 ---

--- PAGE 592 ---
The Basic Tools of Finance
ometime in your life, you will deal with the economy’s financial system. You 
will deposit your savings in a bank account, or you will take out a loan to 
cover tuition or to buy a house. After you have a job, your employer will start 
a retirement account for you, and you will decide whether to invest the funds in 
stocks, bonds, or other financial instruments. If you try to put together your own 
portfolio, you will have to decide between investing in established companies 
such as General Electric or newer ones such as Twitter. And in the media, you 
will hear reports about whether the stock market is up or down, together with the 
often feeble attempts to explain why the market behaves as it does.
If you reflect for a moment on the many financial decisions you 
will make during your life, you will see two related 
 elements in almost all of them: time and risk. 
