--- PAGE 592 ---
The Basic Tools of Finance
ometime in your life, you will deal with the economy’s financial system. You 
will deposit your savings in a bank account, or you will take out a loan to 
cover tuition or to buy a house. After you have a job, your employer will start 
a retirement account for you, and you will decide whether to invest the funds in 
stocks, bonds, or other financial instruments. If you try to put together your own 
portfolio, you will have to decide between investing in established companies 
such as General Electric or newer ones such as Twitter. And in the media, you 
will hear reports about whether the stock market is up or down, together with the 
often feeble attempts to explain why the market behaves as it does.
If you reflect for a moment on the many financial decisions you 
will make during your life, you will see two related 
 elements in almost all of them: time and risk. 
--- PAGE 593 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
As we saw in the preceding two chapters, the financial system coordinates the 
economy’s saving and investment, which in turn are crucial determinants of eco-
nomic growth. Most fundamentally, the financial system concerns decisions and 
actions we undertake today that will affect our lives in the future. But the future 
is unknown. When a person decides to allocate some saving, or a firm decides 
to undertake an investment, the decision is based on a guess about the likely 
result. The actual result, however, could end up being very different from what 
This chapter introduces some tools that help us understand the decisions that 
people make as they participate in financial markets. The field of finance devel-
ops these tools in great detail, and you may choose to take courses that focus on 
this topic. But because the financial system is so important to the functioning of 
the economy, many of the basic insights of finance are central to understanding 
how the economy works. The tools of finance can also help you think through 
some of the decisions that you will make in your own life.
This chapter takes up three topics. First, we discuss how to compare sums of 
money at different points in time. Second, we discuss how to manage risk. Third, 
we build on our analysis of time and risk to examine what determines the value of 
an asset, such as a share of stock.
the field that studies how 
27-1 Present Value: Measuring the Time Value
--- PAGE 594 ---
CHAPTER 27   THE BASIC TOOLS OF FINANCE
Question: Now suppose you are going to be paid $200 in N years. What is 
the present value of this future payment? That is, how much would you have to 
deposit in a bank right now to yield $200 in N years?
 Answer: To answer this question, just turn the previous answer on its head. In 
the last question, we computed a future value from a present value by multiplying 
by the factor (1 1 r)N. To compute a present value from a future value, we divide by 
the factor (1 1 r)N. Thus, the present value of $200 in N years is $200/(1 1 r)N. If that 
amount is deposited in a bank today, after N years it will become (1 1 r)N 3 [$200/
(1 1 r)N], which equals $200. For instance, if the interest rate is 5 percent, the present 
value of $200 to be paid in 10 years is $200/(1.05)10, or $123. This means that $123 
deposited today in a bank account that earned 5 percent would produce $200 after 
This illustrates the general formula: 
• If r is the interest rate, then an amount X to be received in N years has a 
present value of X/(1 1 r)N. 
Because the possibility of earning interest reduces the present value below the 
amount X, the process of finding a present value of a future sum of money is 
called discounting. This formula shows precisely how much future sums should 
Let’s now return to our earlier question: Should you choose $100 today or $200 
in 10 years? Based on our calculation of present value using an interest rate of 
5 percent, you should 
--- PAGE 595 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
To make the right choice, you need to calculate the present value of the stream 
of payments. Let’s suppose the interest rate is 7 percent. After performing 50 
calculations similar to those above (one calculation for each payment) and adding 
up the results, you would learn that the present value of this million-dollar 
prize at a 7 percent interest rate is only $276,000. You are better off picking the 
immediate payment of $400,000. The million dollars may seem like more money, 
but the future cash flows, once discounted to the present, are worth far less.
The interest rate is 7 percent. What is the present value of $150 to be 
The Magic of Compounding and the Rule of 70
uppose you observe that one country has an average growth rate 
of 1 percent per year, while another has an average growth rate of 
3 percent per year. At first, this might not seem like a big deal. What 
difference can 2 percent make? 
The answer is: a big difference. Growth rates that seem small when 
written in percentage terms are large after they are compounded for 
Consider an example. Suppose that two college graduates—Elliot 
and Darlene—both take their first jobs at the age of 22 earning $30,000 
a year. Elliot lives in an economy where all incomes grow at 1 percent 
per year, while Darlene lives in one where incomes grow at 3 percent per 
year. Straightforward calculations show what happens. Forty years later, 
when both are 62 years old, Elliot earns $45
--- PAGE 596 ---
CHAPTER 27   THE BASIC TOOLS OF FINANCE
For example, suppose a friend offers you the following opportunity. She will 
toss a coin. If it comes up heads, she will pay you $1,000. But if it comes up tails, 
you will have to pay her $1,000. Would you accept the bargain? You wouldn’t if 
you were risk averse. For a risk-averse person, the pain of losing the $1,000 would 
exceed the pleasure from winning $1,000.
Economists have developed models of risk aversion using the concept of utility, 
which is a person’s subjective measure of well-being or satisfaction. Every level of 
wealth provides a certain amount of utility, as shown by the utility function in 
Figure 1. But the function exhibits the property of diminishing marginal utility: 
The more wealth a person has, the less utility she gets from an additional dollar. 
Thus, in the figure, the utility function gets flatter as wealth increases. Because 
of diminishing marginal utility, the utility lost from losing the $1,000 bet is more 
than the utility gained from winning it. As a result, people are risk averse.
Risk aversion provides the starting point for explaining various things we 
observe in the economy. Let’s consider three of them: insurance, diversification, 
and the risk-return trade-off.
27-2b The Markets for Insurance
One way to deal with risk is to buy insurance. The general feature of insurance 
contracts is that a person facing a risk pays a fee to an insurance company, which 
in return agrees to accept all or par
--- PAGE 597 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
the insurance company is counting on the fact that most people will not make 
claims on their policies; otherwise, it couldn’t pay out large claims to the unlucky 
few and still stay in business.
From the standpoint of the economy as a whole, the role of insurance is not 
to eliminate the risks inherent in life but to spread them around more efficiently. 
Consider fire insurance, for instance. Owning fire insurance does not reduce the 
risk of losing your home in a fire. But if that unlucky event occurs, the insurance 
company compensates you. The risk, rather than being borne by you alone, is 
shared among the thousands of insurance-company shareholders. Because people 
are risk averse, it is easier for 10,000 people to bear 1/10,000 of the risk than for 
one person to bear the entire risk herself.
The markets for insurance suffer from two types of problems that impede their 
ability to spread risk. One problem is adverse selection: A high-risk person is more 
likely to apply for insurance than a low-risk person because a high-risk person 
would benefit more from insurance protection. A second problem is moral hazard: 
After people buy insurance, they have less incentive to be careful about their 
risky behavior because the insurance company will cover much of the resulting 
losses. Insurance companies are aware of these problems, but they cannot fully 
guard against them. An insurance company cannot perfectly distinguish between 
h
--- PAGE 598 ---
CHAPTER 27   THE BASIC TOOLS OF FINANCE
tie her own fortune to that of any single company. Risk can be reduced by placing 
a large number of small bets, rather than a small number of large ones.
Figure 2 shows how the risk of a portfolio of stocks depends on the number of 
stocks in the portfolio. Risk is measured here with a statistic called the standard 
deviation, which you may have learned about in a math or statistics class. The 
standard deviation measures the volatility of a variable—that is, how much the 
variable is likely to fluctuate. The higher the standard deviation of a portfolio’s 
return, the more volatile its return is likely to be, and the riskier it is that someone 
holding the portfolio will fail to get the return that she expected. 
The figure shows that the risk of a stock portfolio falls substantially as the 
number of stocks increases. For a portfolio with a single stock, the standard 
deviation is 49 percent. Going from 1 stock to 10 stocks eliminates about half 
the risk. Going from 10 to 20 stocks reduces the risk by another 10 percent. As 
the number of stocks continues to increase, risk continues to fall, although the 
reductions in risk after 20 or 30 stocks are small.
Notice that it is impossible to eliminate all risk by increasing the number of 
stocks in the portfolio. Diversification can eliminate firm-specific risk—the 
uncertainty associated with the specific companies. But diversification cannot 
eliminate market risk—the uncertainty assoc
--- PAGE 599 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
rates of return than alternative financial assets, such as bonds and bank savings 
accounts. Over the past two centuries, stocks offered an average real return of 
about 8 percent per year, while short-term government bonds paid a real return of 
When deciding how to allocate their savings, people have to decide how much 
risk they are willing to undertake to earn a higher return. For example, consider a 
person choosing how to allocate her portfolio between two asset classes: 
• The first asset class is a diversified group of risky stocks, with an average 
return of 8 percent and a standard deviation of 20 percent. (You may recall 
from a math or statistics class that a normal random variable stays within 2 
standard deviations of its average about 95 percent of the time. Thus, while 
actual returns are centered around 8 percent, they typically vary from a gain 
of 48 percent to a loss of 32 percent.) 
• The second asset class is a safe alternative, with a return of 3 percent and a 
standard deviation of zero. The safe alternative can be either a bank savings 
account or a government bond.
Figure 3 illustrates the trade-off between risk and return. Each point in this figure 
represents a particular allocation of a portfolio between risky stocks and the safe 
asset. The figure shows that the more the individual puts into stocks, the greater 
both the risk and the return are.
Acknowledging the risk-return trade-off does not, by itself
--- PAGE 600 ---
CHAPTER 27   THE BASIC TOOLS OF FINANCE
Now that we have developed a basic understanding of the two building blocks 
of finance—time and risk—let’s apply this knowledge. This section considers 
a simple question: What determines the price of a share of stock? As with most 
prices, the answer is supply and demand. But that is not the end of the story. To 
understand stock prices, we need to think more deeply about what determines a 
person’s willingness to pay for a share of stock. 
27-3a Fundamental Analysis
Let’s imagine that you have decided to put 60 percent of your savings into stock, 
and to achieve diversification, you have decided to buy twenty different stocks. If 
you open up the newspaper, you will find thousands of stocks listed. How should 
you pick the twenty for your portfolio? 
When you buy stock, you are buying shares in a business. To decide which 
businesses you want to own, it is natural to consider two things: the value of that 
share of the business and the price at which the shares are being sold. If the price 
is less than the value, the stock is said to be undervalued. If the price is more than 
the value, the stock is said to be overvalued. If the price and the value are equal, the 
stock is said to be fairly valued. When choosing twenty stocks for your portfolio, 
you should prefer undervalued stocks. In these cases, you are getting a bargain by 
paying less than the business is worth.
This is easier said than done. Learning the price is easy: You ca
--- PAGE 601 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
To understand this theory, the starting point is to acknowledge that each company 
listed on a major stock exchange is followed closely by many money managers, 
such as the individuals who run mutual funds. Every day, these managers monitor 
news stories and conduct fundamental analysis to try to determine the stock’s 
value. Their job is to buy a stock when its price falls below its fundamental value 
and to sell it when its price rises above its fundamental value.
The second piece to the efficient markets hypothesis is that the equilibrium of 
supply and demand sets the market price. This means that, at the market price, 
the number of shares being offered for sale exactly equals the number of shares 
that people want to buy. In other words, at the market price, the number of people 
who think the stock is overvalued exactly balances the number of people who 
think it’s undervalued. As judged by the typical person in the market, all stocks 
are fairly valued all the time.
According to this theory, the stock market exhibits informational efficiency: It 
reflects all available information about the value of the asset. Stock prices change 
when information changes. When good news about the company’s prospects 
becomes public, the value and the stock price both rise. When the company’s 
prospects deteriorate, the value and price both fall. But at any moment in time, the 
market price is the best guess of the company’s value based on av
--- PAGE 602 ---
CHAPTER 27   THE BASIC TOOLS OF FINANCE
There is much evidence that stock prices, even if not exactly 
a random walk, are very close to it. For example, you might 
be tempted to buy stocks that have recently risen and avoid 
stocks that have recently fallen (or perhaps just the opposite). 
But statistical studies have shown that following such trends (or 
bucking them) fails to outperform the market. The correlation 
between how well a stock does one year and how well it does 
the following year is about zero.
Some of the best evidence in favor of the efficient markets 
hypothesis comes from the performance of index funds. 
An index fund is a mutual fund that buys all the stocks in 
a given stock index. The performance of these funds can be 
compared with that of actively managed mutual funds, where a 
professional portfolio manager picks stocks based on extensive 
research and alleged expertise. In essence, an index fund buys 
all stocks, whereas active funds are supposed to buy only the 
In practice, active managers usually fail to beat index funds. For 
example, in the 15-year period ending February 2016, 81 percent of 
stock mutual funds performed worse than a broadly based index 
fund holding all stocks traded on U.S. stock exchanges. Over this 
period, the average annual return on stock funds fell short of the 
return on the index fund by 0.89 percentage points. Most active 
portfolio managers failed to beat the market because they trade more frequently, 
incurring more
--- PAGE 603 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
The possibility of speculative bubbles in the stock market arises in part because 
the value of the stock to a stockholder depends not only on the stream of dividend 
payments but also on the final sale price. Thus, a person might be willing to pay 
more than a stock is worth today if she expects another person to pay even more for 
it tomorrow. When evaluating a stock, you have to estimate not only the value of the 
business but also what other people will think the business is worth in the future.
There is much debate among economists about the frequency and importance 
of departures from rational pricing. Believers in market irrationality point out 
(correctly) that the stock market often moves in ways that are hard to explain on 
the basis of news that might alter a rational valuation. Believers in the efficient 
markets hypothesis point out (correctly) that it is impossible to know the correct, 
rational valuation of a company, so one should not quickly jump to the conclusion 
that any particular valuation is irrational. Moreover, if the market were irrational, 
a rational person should be able to take advantage of this fact; yet as the previous 
case study discussed, beating the market is nearly impossible.
Fortune magazine regularly publishes a list of the “most respected” 
companies. According to the efficient markets hypothesis, if you restrict 
your stock portfolio to these companies, will you earn a better-than-average ret
--- PAGE 604 ---
CHAPTER 27   THE BASIC TOOLS OF FINANCE
5. The benefit of diversification when constructing a 
portfolio is that it can eliminate
6. According to the efficient markets hypothesis, 
a. changes in stock prices are impossible to predict 
b. excessive diversification can reduce an investor’s 
expected portfolio returns.
c. the stock market moves based on the changing 
animal spirits of investors.
d. actively managed mutual funds should give higher 
• Because savings can earn interest, a sum of money 
today is more valuable than the same sum of money in 
the future. A person can compare sums from different 
times using the concept of present value. The present 
value of any future sum is the amount that would 
be needed today, given prevailing interest rates, to 
• Because of diminishing marginal utility, most people 
are risk averse. Risk-averse people can reduce risk by 
buying insurance, diversifying their holdings, and 
choosing a portfolio with lower risk and lower return. 
• The value of an asset equals the present value of 
the cash flows the owner will receive. For a share 
of stock, these cash flows include the stream of 
dividends and the final sale price. According to the 
efficient markets hypothesis, financial markets process 
available information rationally, so a stock price 
always equals the best estimate of the value of the 
underlying business. Some economists question the 
efficient markets hypothesis, however, and believe that 
irrational psychological factors
--- PAGE 605 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
1. According to an old myth, Native Americans sold the 
island of Manhattan about 400 years ago for $24. If 
they had invested this amount at an interest rate of  
7 percent per year, how much, approximately, would 
2. A company has an investment project that would cost 
$10 million today and yield a payoff of $15 million in 
a. Should the firm undertake the project if the 
interest rate is 11 percent? 10 percent? 9 percent?  
b. Can you figure out the exact cutoff for the interest 
rate between profitability and nonprofitability?
3. Bond A pays $8,000 in 20 years. Bond B pays $8,000 
in 40 years. (To keep things simple, assume these are 
zero-coupon bonds, which means the $8,000 is the 
only payment the bondholder receives.)
a. If the interest rate is 3.5 percent, what is the value 
of each bond today? Which bond is worth more? 
Why? (Hint: You can use a calculator, but the rule 
of 70 should make the calculation easy.)
b. If the interest rate increases to 7 percent, what is 
the value of each bond? Which bond has a larger 
percentage change in value?
c. Based on the example above, complete the two 
blanks in this sentence: “The value of a bond 
[rises/falls] when the interest rate increases, and 
bonds with a longer time to maturity are  
[more/less] sensitive to changes in the interest rate.”
4. Your bank account pays an interest rate of 8 percent. 
You are considering buying a share of stock in XYZ 
Corporation for $110. After 1,
--- PAGE 606 ---
osing a job can be the most distressing economic event in a person’s life. Most 
people rely on their labor earnings to maintain their standard of living, and 
many people also get a sense of personal accomplishment from working. A job 
loss means a lower living standard in the present, anxiety about the future, and 
reduced self-esteem. It is not surprising, therefore, that politicians campaigning 
for office often speak about how their proposed policies will help create jobs.
In previous chapters, we have seen some of the forces that determine the level 
and growth of a country’s standard of living. A country that saves and invests a 
high fraction of its income, for instance, enjoys more rapid growth in its cap-
ital stock and GDP than a similar country that saves and  invests 
less. An even more obvious determinant of a country’s 
