--- PAGE 606 ---
osing a job can be the most distressing economic event in a person’s life. Most 
people rely on their labor earnings to maintain their standard of living, and 
many people also get a sense of personal accomplishment from working. A job 
loss means a lower living standard in the present, anxiety about the future, and 
reduced self-esteem. It is not surprising, therefore, that politicians campaigning 
for office often speak about how their proposed policies will help create jobs.
In previous chapters, we have seen some of the forces that determine the level 
and growth of a country’s standard of living. A country that saves and invests a 
high fraction of its income, for instance, enjoys more rapid growth in its cap-
ital stock and GDP than a similar country that saves and  invests 
less. An even more obvious determinant of a country’s 
--- PAGE 607 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
standard of living is the amount of unemployment it typically experiences. People 
who would like to work but cannot find a job are not contributing to the econo-
my’s production of goods and services. Although some degree of unemployment 
is inevitable in a complex economy with thousands of firms and millions of work-
ers, the amount of unemployment varies substantially over time and across coun-
tries. When a country keeps its workers as fully employed as possible, it achieves 
a higher level of GDP than it would if it left many of its workers idle.
This chapter begins our study of unemployment. The problem of unemploy-
ment can be divided into two categories: the long-run problem and the short-
run problem. The economy’s natural rate of unemployment refers to the amount of 
unemployment that the economy normally experiences. Cyclical unemployment
refers to the year-to-year fluctuations in unemployment around its natural rate, 
and it is closely associated with the short-run ups and downs of economic activity. 
Cyclical unemployment has its own explanation, which we defer until we study 
short-run economic fluctuations later in this book. In this chapter, we discuss the 
determinants of an economy’s natural rate of unemployment. As we will see, the 
designation natural does not imply that this rate of unemployment is desirable. 
Nor 
--- PAGE 608 ---
member’s business. Both full-time and part-time workers are counted. This 
category also includes those who were not working but who had jobs from 
which they were temporarily absent because of, for example, vacation,  
r Unemployed: This category includes those who were not employed, were 
available for work, and had tried to find employment during the previous 
four weeks. It also includes those waiting to be recalled to a job from which 
r Not in the labor force: This category includes those who fit neither of the first 
two categories, such as full-time students, homemakers, and retirees.
Figure 1 shows the breakdown into these categories for January 2016.
Once the BLS has placed all the individuals covered by the survey in a cate-
gory, it computes various statistics to summarize the state of the labor market. 
The BLS defines the labor force as the sum of the employed and the unemployed: 
Labor force 5 Number of employed 1 Number of unemployed.
The BLS defines the unemployment rate as the percentage of the labor force that 
The BLS computes unemployment rates for the entire adult population and for 
specific groups defined by race, gender, and so on.
The Breakdown of the Population in  
The Bureau of Labor Statistics divides the 
adult population into three categories: 
employed, unemployed, and not in the 
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics.
--- PAGE 609 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
The BLS uses the same survey to produce data on labor-force participation. The 
labor-force participation rate measures the percentage of the total adult popula-
tion of the United States that is in the labor force:
Labor-force participation rate 5
This statistic tells us the fraction of the population that has chosen to participate 
in the labor market. The labor-force participation rate, like the unemployment 
rate, is computed for both the entire adult population and more specific groups.
To see how these data are computed, consider the figures for January 2016. At 
that time, 150.5 million people were employed, and 7.8 million people were un-
employed. The labor force was
Labor force 5 150.5 1 7.8 5 158.3 million.
Unemployment rate 5 (7.8/158.3) 3 100 5 4.9 percent.
Because the adult population was 252.4 million, the labor-force participation rate 
Labor-force participation rate 5 (158.3/252.4) 3 100 5 62.7 percent.
Hence, in January 2016, almost two-thirds of the U.S. adult population were par-
ticipating in the labor market, and 4.9 percent of those labor-market participants 
Table 1 shows the statistics on unemployment and labor-force participation for 
various groups within the U.S. population. Three comparisons are most appar-
ent. First, women of prime working age (25 to 54 years old) have lower rates of 
labor-force particip
--- PAGE 610 ---
of unemployment. Third, teenagers have much lower rates of labor-force partic-
ipation and much higher rates of unemployment than older workers. More gen-
erally, these data show that labor-market experiences vary widely among groups 
The BLS data on the labor market also allow economists and policymakers to 
monitor changes in the economy over time. Figure 2 shows the unemployment rate 
in the United States since 1960. The figure shows that the economy always has some 
unemployment and that the amount changes from year to year. The normal rate 
of unemployment around which the unemployment rate fluctuates is called the 
natural rate of unemployment, and the deviation of unemployment from its natu-
ral rate is called cyclical unemployment. The natural rate of unemployment shown 
in the figure is a series estimated by economists at the Congressional Budget Office. 
For 2015, they estimated a natural rate of 4.9 percent, close to the actual unemploy-
ment rate of 5.3 percent. Later in this book, we discuss short-run economic fluctua-
tions, including the year-to-year fluctuations in unemployment around its natural 
rate. In the rest of this chapter, however, we ignore the short-run fluctuations and 
examine why there is always some unemployment in market economies.
LABOR-FORCE PARTICIPATION OF MEN AND WOMEN IN THE U.S. 
Women’s role in American society has changed dramatically ov
--- PAGE 611 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
is attributable to improved birth control, which has reduced the number of children 
born to the typical family. This change in women’s role is also partly attributable to 
changing political and social attitudes, which in turn may have been facilitated by 
the advances in technology and birth control. Together these developments have 
had a profound impact on society in general and on the economy in particular.
Nowhere is that impact more obvious than in data on labor-force participation. 
Figure 3 shows the labor-force participation rates of men and women in the United 
States since 1950. Just after World War II, men and women had very different roles 
in society. Only 33 percent of women were working or looking for work, in contrast 
to 87 percent of men. Since then, this difference in participation rates has gradually 
diminished, as growing numbers of women have entered the labor force and some 
men have left it. Data for 2015 show that 57 percent of women were in the labor 
force, in contrast to 69 percent of men. As measured by labor-force participation, 
men and women are now playing a more equal role in the economy.
The increase in women’s labor-force participation is easy to understand, but the 
fall in men’s may seem puzzling. There are several reasons for this decline. First, 
young men now stay in school longer than their 
--- PAGE 612 ---
Source: U.S. Department of Labor.
Persons unemployed 15 weeks or longer, as a percent of the civilian 
labor force (includes only very long-term unemployed)
Job losers and persons who have completed temporary jobs, as a  
percent of the civilian labor force (excludes job leavers)
Total unemployed, as a percent of the civilian labor force (official 
Total unemployed, plus discouraged workers, as a percent of the  
civilian labor force plus discouraged workers
Total unemployed plus all marginally attached workers, as a percent of 
the civilian labor force plus all marginally attached workers
Total unemployed, plus all marginally attached workers, plus total 
employed part-time for economic reasons, as a percent of the civilian 
labor force plus all marginally attached workers
Note: The Bureau of Labor Statistics defines terms as follows: 
t Marginally attached workers are persons who currently are neither working nor looking 
for work but indicate that they want and are available for a job and have looked for work 
sometime in the recent past. 
t Discouraged workers are marginally attached workers who have given a job-market-
related reason for not currently looking for a job. 
t Persons employed part-time for economic reasons are those who want and are available 
for full-time work but have had to settle for a part-time schedule.
Movements into and out of the labor force a
--- PAGE 613 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
28-1c How Long Are the Unemployed without Work?
In judging how serious the problem of unemployment is, one question to con-
sider is whether unemployment is typically a short-term or long-term condition. 
If unemployment is short-term, one might conclude that it is not a big problem. 
Workers may require a few weeks between jobs to find the openings that best suit 
their tastes and skills. Yet if unemployment is long-term, one might conclude that 
it is a serious problem. Workers unemployed for many months are more likely to 
suffer economic and psychological hardship. 
Because the duration of unemployment can affect our view about how big a 
problem unemployment is, economists have devoted much energy to studying 
data on the duration of unemployment spells. In this work, they have uncov-
ered a result that is important, subtle, and seemingly contradictory: Most spells of 
To see how this statement can be true, consider an example. Suppose that you 
visited the government’s unemployment office every week for a year to survey 
the unemployed. Each week you find that there are four unemployed workers. 
Three of these workers are the same individuals for the whole year, while the 
fourth person changes every week. Based on this experience, would you say that 
unemployment is typically short-term or long-term?
Some simple calculations hel
--- PAGE 614 ---
hen the Bureau of Labor Statistics announces the unemployment 
rate at the beginning of every month, it also announces the num-
ber of jobs the economy has gained or lost. As an indicator of short-run 
economic trends, the jobs number gets as much attention as the unem-
Where does the jobs number come from? You might guess that 
it comes from the same survey of 60,000 households that yields the 
unemployment rate. And indeed the household survey does produce data 
on total employment. The jobs number that gets the most attention, how-
ever, comes from a separate survey of 160,000 business establishments, 
which have over 40 million workers on their payrolls. The results from 
the establishment survey are announced at the same time as the results 
from the household survey.
Both surveys yield information about total employment, but the 
results are not always the same. One reason is that the establishment 
survey has a larger sample, which makes it more reliable. Another 
reason is that the surveys 
are not measuring exactly 
ple, a person who has two 
part-time jobs at different 
companies would be counted 
as one employed person in the house-
hold survey but as two jobs in the establishment survey. As another 
example, a person running his own small business would be counted 
as employed in the household survey but would not show up at all in 
the establishment survey, because
--- PAGE 615 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
One reason economies always experience some unemployment is job search. Job 
search is the process of matching workers with appropriate jobs. If all workers 
and all jobs were the same, so that all workers were equally well suited for all 
jobs, job search would not be a problem. Laid-off workers would quickly find new 
jobs that were well suited for them. But in fact, workers differ in their tastes and 
skills, jobs differ in their attributes, and information about job candidates and job 
vacancies is disseminated slowly among the many firms and households in the 
28-2a Why Some Frictional Unemployment Is Inevitable
Frictional unemployment is often the result of changes in the demand for labor 
among different firms. When consumers decide that they prefer Ford to General 
Motors cars, Ford increases employment and General Motors lays off workers. 
The former General Motors workers must now search for new jobs, and Ford 
must decide which new workers to hire for the various jobs that have opened up. 
The result of this transition is a period of unemployment.
Similarly, because different regions of the country produce different goods, 
employment can rise in one region while it falls in another. Consider, for 
instance, what happens when the world price of oil falls. Oil-producing firms in 
Texas and North Dakota respond to the lower pr
--- PAGE 616 ---
help facilitate job search and reduce frictional unemployment. In addition, public 
policy may play a role. If policy can reduce the time it takes unemployed workers 
to find new jobs, it can reduce the economy’s natural rate of unemployment.
Government programs try to facilitate job search in various ways. One way 
is through government-run employment agencies, which give out information 
about job vacancies. Another way is through public training programs, which 
aim to ease workers’ transition from declining to growing industries and to help 
disadvantaged groups escape poverty. Advocates of these programs believe that 
they make the economy operate more efficiently by keeping the labor force more 
fully employed and that they reduce the inequities inherent in a constantly chang-
Critics of these programs question whether the government should get 
involved with the process of job search. They argue that it is better to let the pri-
vate market match workers and jobs. In fact, most job search in our economy takes 
place without intervention by the government. Newspaper ads, online job sites, 
college career offices, headhunters, and word of mouth all help spread informa-
tion about job openings and job candidates. Similarly, much worker education is 
done privately, either through schools or through on-the-job training. These critics 
contend that the government is no better
--- PAGE 617 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
run out after 6 months or 1 year. These studies found that when the unemployed 
become ineligible for benefits, the probability of their finding a new job rises 
markedly. Thus, receiving unemployment insurance benefits does reduce the 
search effort of the unemployed.
Even though unemployment insurance reduces search effort and raises unem-
ployment, we should not necessarily conclude that the policy is bad. The program 
does achieve its primary goal of reducing the income uncertainty that workers 
face. In addition, when workers turn down unattractive job offers, they have the 
opportunity to look for jobs that better suit their tastes and skills. Some econo-
mists argue that unemployment insurance improves the ability of the economy to 
match each worker with the most appropriate job.
The study of unemployment insurance shows that the unemployment rate is 
an imperfect measure of a nation’s overall level of economic well-being. Most 
economists agree that eliminating unemployment insurance would reduce the 
amount of unemployment in the economy. Yet economists disagree on whether 
economic well-being would be enhanced or diminished by this change in policy.
How would an increase in the world price of oil affect the amount of 
frictional unemployment? Is this unemployment undesirable? What public 
policies might affect the amount of 
--- PAGE 618 ---
may be “too high.” In the remaining two sections of this chapter, we consider two 
other reasons wages may be kept above the equilibrium level: unions and effi-
ciency wages. The basic economics of unemployment in these cases is the same 
as that shown in Figure 4, but these explanations of unemployment can apply to 
many more of the economy’s workers.
At this point, however, we should stop and notice that the structural unem-
ployment that arises from an above-equilibrium wage is, in an important sense, 
different from the frictional unemployment that arises from the process of job 
search. The need for job search is not due to the failure of wages to balance labor 
supply and labor demand. When job search is the explanation for unemployment, 
workers are searching for the jobs that best suit their tastes and skills. By contrast, 
when the wage is above the equilibrium level, the quantity of labor supplied 
exceeds the quantity of labor demanded, and workers are unemployed because 
they are waiting for jobs to open up. 
Draw the supply curve and the demand curve for a labor market in which 
the wage is fixed above the equilibrium level. Show the quantity of labor 
supplied, the quantity demanded, and the amount of unemployment.
Unemployment from a Wage above the 
In this labor market, supply and demand 
are balanced at the wage WE. At this 
equilibrium wage, the quantity of la
--- PAGE 619 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
hourly paid workers, about 4 percent reported wages at or below the prevail-
ing federal minimum. Thus, the minimum wage directly affects about  
r Minimum-wage workers are more likely to be female. Among hourly paid 
workers, 5 percent of women had wages at or below the minimum wage, 
compared with 3 percent of men.
r Minimum-wage workers tend to be young. Among employed teenagers 
(ages 16 to 19) paid by the hour, about 15 percent earned the minimum wage 
or less, compared with 3 percent of hourly paid workers age 25 and older.  
r Minimum-wage workers tend to be less educated. Among hourly paid work-
ers age 16 and older, about 7 percent of those without a high school diploma 
earned the minimum wage or less, compared with about 4 percent of those 
who completed a high school diploma (but did not attend college) and about 
2 percent for those who had obtained a college degree.
An economist who studies the minimum 
wage says there are better ways to help 
Why Market Forces Will Over-
whelm a Higher Minimum Wage
he slogans are everywhere: Fight for 15; 
 People Not Profits; One Job Should Be 
Enough. Worsening income inequality and the 
persistence of poverty have spurred a movement 
to raise the minimum wage, at both the national 
and state levels. Some West Coast cities have 
already voted to boost their minimum wage to 
$15, or 
--- PAGE 620 ---
r Minimum-wage workers are more likely to be working part-time. Among 
part-time workers (those who usually work less than 35 hours per week),  
10 percent were paid the minimum wage or less, compared to 2 percent of 
r The industry with the highest proportion of workers with reported hourly 
wages at or below the minimum wage was leisure and hospitality  
(18 percent). Over half of all workers paid at or below the minimum wage 
were employed in this industry, primarily in food services and drinking  
establishments. For many of these workers, tips supplement the hourly 
r The proportion of hourly paid workers earning the prevailing federal  
minimum wage or less has changed substantially over time. It trended 
downward from 13 percent in 1979, when data collection first began on a 
regular basis, to 2 percent in 2006. It then increased to 4 percent in 2014. This 
recent increase is in part attributable to a legislated increase in the minimum 
wage from $5.15 per hour in 2006 to $7.25 per hour in 2014. ●
some teenagers currently focused on their edu-
cation to take part-time jobs at the new, higher 
minimum, and displace low-skilled workers 
from the jobs they now hold. That seems like a 
If we really want to help low-skilled workers, 
we need to recognize that the solutions that 
actually work are expensive, difficult to achieve 
Guaranteeing a minimally acceptable 
standar
--- PAGE 621 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
28-4 Unions and Collective Bargaining
A union is a worker association that bargains with employers over wages, ben-
efits, and working conditions. Only 11 percent of U.S. workers now belong to 
unions, but unions played a much larger role in the U.S. labor market in the past. 
In the 1940s and 1950s, when union membership was at its peak, about a third of 
the U.S. labor force was unionized.
Moreover, for a variety of historical reasons, unions continue to play a large role 
in many European countries. In Belgium, Norway, and Sweden, for instance, more 
than half of workers belong to unions. In France and Germany, a majority of work-
ers have wages set by collective bargaining by law, even though only some of these 
workers are themselves union members. In these cases, wages are not determined 
by the equilibrium of supply and demand in competitive labor markets.
28-4a The Economics of Unions
A union is a type of cartel. Like any cartel, a union is a group of sellers acting 
together in the hope of exerting their joint market power. Most workers in the 
U.S. economy discuss their wages, benefits, and working conditions with their 
employers as individuals. By contrast, workers in a union do so as a group. The 
process by which unions and firms agree on the terms of employment is called 
When a union bargains with a firm, it asks for hi
--- PAGE 622 ---
encourage the formation of unions. In particular, the Wagner Act of 1935 prevents 
employers from interfering when workers try to organize unions and requires 
employers to bargain with unions in good faith. The National Labor Relations 
Board (NLRB) is the government agency that enforces workers’ right to unionize.
Legislation affecting the market power of unions is a perennial topic of political 
debate. State lawmakers sometimes debate right-to-work laws, which give workers 
in a unionized firm the right to choose whether to join the union. In the absence 
of such laws, unions can insist during collective bargaining that firms make union 
membership a requirement for employment. At times, lawmakers in Washington 
have debated a proposed law that would prevent firms from hiring permanent 
replacements for workers who are on strike. This law would make strikes more 
costly for firms, thereby increasing the market power of unions. These and similar 
policy decisions will help determine the future of the union movement.
28-4b Are Unions Good or Bad for the Economy?
Economists disagree about whether unions are good or bad for the economy as a 
whole. Let’s consider both sides of the debate.
Critics argue that unions are merely a type of cartel. When unions raise wages 
above the level that would prevail in competitive markets, they reduce the quan-
tity of labor demanded, cause s
--- PAGE 623 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
28-5 The Theory of Efficiency Wages
A fourth reason economies always experience some unemployment—in addition 
to job search, minimum-wage laws, and unions—is suggested by the theory of 
efficiency wages. According to this theory, firms operate more efficiently if wages 
are above the equilibrium level. Therefore, it may be profitable for firms to keep 
wages high even in the presence of a surplus of labor.
In some ways, the unemployment that arises from efficiency wages is similar 
to the unemployment that arises from minimum-wage laws and unions. In all 
three cases, unemployment is the result of wages above the level that balances the 
quantity of labor supplied and the quantity of labor demanded. Yet there is also 
an important difference. Minimum-wage laws and unions prevent firms from 
lowering wages in the presence of a surplus of workers. Efficiency-wage theory 
states that such a constraint on firms is unnecessary in many cases because firms 
may be better off keeping wages above the equilibrium level.
Why should firms want to keep wages high? This decision may seem odd at 
first, for wages are a large part of firms’ costs. Normally, we expect profit-maxi-
mizing firms to want to keep costs—and therefore wages—as low as possible. The 
novel insight of efficiency-wage theory is that paying high wages might be profit-
able becau
--- PAGE 624 ---
therefore, will tend to have higher production costs. Firms may find it profitable 
to pay wages above the equilibrium level to reduce worker turnover. 
A third type of efficiency-wage theory emphasizes the link between wages and 
worker quality. All firms want workers who are talented, and they strive to pick 
the best applicants to fill job openings. But because firms cannot perfectly gauge 
the quality of applicants, hiring has a degree of randomness to it. When a firm 
pays a high wage, it attracts a better pool of workers to apply for its jobs and 
thereby increases the quality of its workforce. If the firm responded to a surplus 
of labor by reducing the wage, the most competent applicants—who are more 
likely to have better alternative opportunities than less competent applicants—
may choose not to apply. If this influence of the wage on worker quality is strong 
enough, it may be profitable for the firm to pay a wage above the level that bal-
A fourth and final type of efficiency-wage theory emphasizes the link between 
wages and worker effort. In many jobs, workers have some discretion over how 
hard to work. As a result, firms monitor the efforts of their workers, and workers 
caught shirking their responsibilities are fired. But because monitoring is costly 
and imperfect, not all shirkers are caught immediately. A firm in such a circum-
stance is always looking for 
--- PAGE 625 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
In 1914, Ford introduced another innovation: the $5 workday. This might not 
seem like much today, but back then $5 was about twice the going wage. It was 
also far above the wage that balanced supply and demand. When the new $5-a-day 
wage was announced, long lines of job seekers formed outside the Ford factories. 
The number of workers willing to work at this wage far exceeded the number of 
Ford’s high-wage policy had many of the effects predicted by efficiency-wage 
theory. Turnover fell, absenteeism fell, and productivity rose. Workers were so 
much more efficient that Ford’s production costs were lower despite higher wages. 
Thus, paying a wage above the equilibrium level was profitable for the firm. An 
historian of the early Ford Motor Company wrote, “Ford and his associates freely 
declared on many occasions that the high-wage policy turned out to be good busi-
ness. By this they meant that it had improved the discipline of the workers, given 
them a more loyal interest in the institution, and raised their personal efficiency.” 
Henry Ford himself called the $5-a-day wage “one of the finest cost-cutting moves 
Why did it take a Henry Ford to introduce this efficiency wage? Why were other 
firms not already taking advantage of this seemingly profitable business strategy? 
According to some analysts, Ford’s decision was closely 
--- PAGE 626 ---
1. The population of Ectenia is 100 people: 40 work 
full-time, 20 work half-time but would prefer to work 
full-time, 10 are looking for a job, 10 would like to 
work but are so discouraged they have given up look-
ing, 10 are not interested in working because they 
are full-time students, and 10 are retired. What is the 
2. Using the numbers in the preceding question, what is 
the size of Ectenia’s labor force?
3. The main policy goal of the unemployment insurance 
a. search effort of the unemployed.
b. income uncertainty that workers face.
c. role of unions in wage setting.
d. amount of frictional unemployment.
4. In a competitive labor market, when the government 
increases the minimum wage, the result is a(n) 
__________ in the quantity of labor supplied and a(n) 
__________ in the quantity of labor demanded.
5. Unionized workers are paid about _____ percent more 
than similar nonunion workers.
6. According to the theory of efficiency wages,
a. firms may find it profitable to pay above- 
b. an excess supply of labor puts downward pressure 
c. sectoral shifts are the main source of frictional 
d. right-to-work laws reduce the bargaining power of 
r The unemployment rate is the percentage of those who 
would like to work who do not have jobs. The Bureau 
of Labor Statistics calculates this statistic monthly 
based on a survey of thousands of households.
r The unemployment 
--- PAGE 627 ---
PART IX   THE REAL ECONOMY IN THE LONG RUN
labor-force participation rate, p. 580
natural rate of unemployment, p. 581
cyclical unemployment, p. 581
discouraged workers, p. 583
frictional unemployment, p. 585
structural unemployment, p. 585
unemployment insurance, p. 587
collective bargaining, p. 592
1. What are the three categories into which the Bureau of 
Labor Statistics divides everyone? How does the BLS 
compute the labor force, the unemployment rate, and 
the labor-force participation rate?
2. Is unemployment typically short-term or long-term? 
3. Why is frictional unemployment inevitable? How 
might the government reduce the amount of frictional 
4. Are minimum-wage laws a better explanation for 
structural unemployment among teenagers or among 
5. How do unions affect the natural rate of 
6. What claims do advocates of unions make to argue 
that unions are good for the economy?
7. Explain four ways in which a firm might increase its 
profits by raising the wages it pays.
1. In June 2009, at the trough of the Great Recession, the 
Bureau of Labor Statistics announced that of all adult 
Americans, 140,196,000 were employed, 14,729,000 
were unemployed, and 80,729,000 were not in the  
labor force. Use this information to calculate:
c. the labor-force participation rate
2. Explain whether each of the following events  
increases, decreases, or has no effect on the unemplo
--- PAGE 628 ---
which statistic is the more meaningful gauge of how 
well the economy is doing?
a. An auto company goes bankrupt and lays off its 
workers, who immediately start looking for new 
b. After an unsuccessful search, some of the laid-off 
workers quit looking for new jobs.
c. Numerous students graduate from college but 
d. Numerous students graduate from college and 
immediately begin new jobs.
e. A stock market boom induces newly enriched 
60-year-old workers to take early retirement.
f. Advances in healthcare prolong the life of many 
6. Are the following workers more likely to experience 
short-term or long-term unemployment? Explain.
a. a construction worker who is laid off because of 
b. a manufacturing worker who loses his job at a 
c. a stagecoach-industry worker who is laid off  
because of competition from railroads
d. a short-order cook who loses his job when a new 
restaurant opens across the street
e. an expert welder with little formal education who 
loses his job when the company installs automatic 
7. Using a diagram of the labor market, show the effect 
of an increase in the minimum wage on the wage 
paid to workers, the number of workers supplied, the 
number of workers demanded, and the amount of 
8. Consider an economy with two labor markets—one 
for manufacturing workers and one for service work-
ers. Suppose initially that neither is unionized. 
a. If manufactur
--- PAGE 629 ---

--- PAGE 630 ---

