--- PAGE 632 ---
hen you walk into a restaurant to buy a meal, you get something of value—a 
full stomach. To pay for this service, you might hand the restaurateur 
several worn-out pieces of greenish paper decorated with strange symbols, 
government buildings, and the portraits of famous dead Americans. Or you might 
hand her a single piece of paper with the name of a bank and your signature. 
Or you might show her a plastic card and sign a paper slip. Whether you pay 
by cash, check, or debit card, the restaurateur is happy to work hard to satisfy 
your gastronomical desires in exchange for these pieces of paper, which, in and of 
themselves, are worthless.
Anyone who has lived in a modern economy is familiar with 
this social custom. Even though paper money has no 
intrinsic value, the restaurateur is confident 
--- PAGE 633 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
that, in the future, some third person will accept it in exchange for something 
that the restaurateur does value. And that third person is confident that some 
fourth person will accept the money, with the knowledge that yet a fifth person 
will accept the money . . . and so on. To the restaurateur and to other people in 
our society, your cash, check, or debit card receipt represents a claim to goods and 
The social custom of using money for transactions is extraordinarily useful in a 
large, complex society. Imagine, for a moment, that there was no item in the econ-
omy widely accepted in exchange for goods and services. People would have to rely 
on barter—the exchange of one good or service for another—to obtain the things 
they need. To get your restaurant meal, for instance, you would have to offer the 
restaurateur something of immediate value. You could offer to wash some dishes, 
mow her lawn, or give her your family’s secret recipe for meat loaf. An economy 
that relies on barter will have trouble allocating its scarce resources efficiently. In 
such an economy, trade is said to require the double coincidence of wants—the  unlikely 
occurrence that two people each have a good or service that the other wants.
The existence of money makes trade easier. The restaurateur does not care 
whether you can produce a valuable good or s
--- PAGE 634 ---
CHAPTER 29   THE MONETARY SYSTEM
29-1a The Functions of Money
Money has three functions in the economy: It is a medium of exchange, a unit of 
account, and a store of value. These three functions together distinguish money 
from other assets in the economy, such as stocks, bonds, real estate, art, and even 
baseball cards. Let’s examine each of these functions of money.
A medium of exchange is an item that buyers give to sellers when they purchase 
goods and services. When you go to a store to buy a shirt, the store gives you the 
shirt and you give the store your money. This transfer of money from buyer to 
seller allows the transaction to take place. When you walk into a store, you are 
confident that the store will accept your money for the items it is selling because 
money is the commonly accepted medium of exchange. 
A unit of account is the yardstick people use to post prices and record debts. 
When you go shopping, you might observe that a shirt costs $50 and a hamburger 
costs $5. Even though it would be accurate to say that the price of a shirt is 10 
hamburgers and the price of a hamburger is 1/10  of a shirt, prices are never quoted 
in this way. Similarly, if you take out a loan from a bank, the size of your future 
loan repayments will be measured in dollars, not in a quantity of goods and 
services. When we want to measure and record economic value, we use money 
--- PAGE 635 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
Another example of commodity money is cigarettes. In prisoner-of-war camps 
during World War II, prisoners traded goods and services with one another 
using cigarettes as the store of value, unit of account, and medium of exchange. 
Similarly, as the Soviet Union was breaking up in the late 1980s, cigarettes started 
replacing the ruble as the preferred currency in Moscow. In both cases, even 
nonsmokers were happy to accept cigarettes in an exchange, knowing that they 
could use the cigarettes to buy other goods and services.
Money without intrinsic value is called fiat money. A fiat is an order or decree, and 
fiat money is established as money by government decree. For example, compare the 
paper dollars in your wallet (printed by the U.S. government) and the paper dollars 
from a game of Monopoly (printed by the Parker Brothers game company). Why can 
you use the first to pay your bill at a restaurant but not the second? The answer is that 
the U.S. government has decreed its dollars to be valid money. Each paper dollar in 
your wallet reads: “This note is legal tender for all debts, public and private.”
Although the government is central to establishing and regulating a system 
of fiat money (by prosecuting counterfeiters, for example), other factors are 
also required for the success of such a monetary system. To a large extent, t
--- PAGE 636 ---
CHAPTER 29   THE MONETARY SYSTEM
29-1c Money in the U.S. Economy
As we will see, the quantity of money circulating in the economy, called the money 
stock, has a powerful influence on many economic variables. But before we consider 
why that is true, we need to ask a preliminary question: What is the quantity of 
money? In particular, suppose you were given the task of measuring how much 
money there is in the U.S. economy. What would you include in your measure?
The most obvious asset to include is currency—the paper bills and coins in 
the hands of the public. Currency is clearly the most widely accepted medium of 
exchange in our economy. There is no doubt that it is part of the money stock.
Yet currency is not the only asset that you can use to buy goods and services. 
Many stores also accept personal checks. Wealth held in your checking account is 
almost as convenient for buying things as wealth held in your wallet. To measure 
the money stock, therefore, you might want to include demand deposits—balances 
in bank accounts that depositors can access on demand simply by writing a check 
or swiping a debit card at a store.
Once you start to consider balances in checking accounts as part of the money 
stock, you are led to consider the large variety of other accounts that people hold 
at banks and other financial institutions. Bank depositors usually cannot write 
checks aga
--- PAGE 637 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
In a complex economy such as ours, it is not easy to draw a line between assets 
that can be called “money” and assets that cannot. The coins in your pocket 
clearly are part of the money stock, and the Empire State Building clearly is not, 
but there are many assets in between these extremes for which the choice is less 
clear. Because different analysts can reasonably disagree about where to draw the 
dividing line between monetary and nonmonetary assets, various measures of 
the money stock are available for the U.S. economy. Figure 1 shows the two most 
commonly used, designated M1 and M2. M2 includes more assets in its measure 
For our purposes in this book, we need not dwell on the differences between the 
various measures of money. None of our discussion will hinge on the distinction 
between M1 and M2. The important point is that the money stock for the U.S. 
economy includes not only currency but also deposits in banks and other financial 
institutions that can be readily accessed and used to buy goods and services.
Two Measures of the Money Stock  
The two most widely followed measures 
of the money stock are M1 and M2. 
This figure shows the size of each 
,'% $#&'&
,#"+!%'!('( ("&
WHERE IS ALL THE CURRENCY?
One puzzle about the money stock of the U.S. economy concerns 
the amount of currency. In 
--- PAGE 638 ---
CHAPTER 29   THE MONETARY SYSTEM
Why Credit Cards Aren’t Money
t might seem natural to include credit cards as part of the economy’s 
stock of money. After all, people use credit cards to make many of their 
purchases. Aren’t credit cards, therefore, a medium of exchange?
At first this argument may seem persuasive, but credit cards are 
excluded from all measures of the quantity of money. The reason is that 
credit cards are not really a method of payment but rather a method of 
deferring payment. When you buy a meal with a credit card, the bank 
that issued the card pays the restaurant what it is due. At a later date, 
you will have to repay the bank (perhaps with interest). When the time 
comes to pay your credit card bill, you will probably do so by writing 
a check against your checking account. The balance in this checking 
account is part of the economy’s stock of money.
Notice that credit cards are different from debit cards, which 
automatically withdraw funds from a bank account to pay for items 
bought. Rather than allowing the user to postpone payment for a 
purchase, a debit card gives the user immediate access to deposits in 
sense, a debit card is more 
similar to a check than to 
a credit card. The account 
debit cards are included in 
measures of the quantity of money.
Even though credit cards are not considered a form of money, they 
are nonetheless important f
--- PAGE 639 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
lifetime appointments to insulate them from politics, Fed governors are given 
long terms to give them independence from short-term political pressures when 
they formulate monetary policy.
Among the seven members of the board of governors, the most important is the 
chair. The chair directs the Fed staff, presides over board meetings, and testifies 
regularly about Fed policy in front of congressional committees. The president 
appoints the chair to a 4-year term. As this book was going to press, the chair of 
the Fed was Janet Yellen, a former economics professor who was appointed to the 
Fed job by President Barack Obama in 2014.
The Federal Reserve System is made up of the Federal Reserve Board in 
Washington, D.C., and twelve regional Federal Reserve Banks located in major 
cities around the country. The presidents of the regional banks are chosen by each 
bank’s board of directors, whose members are typically drawn from the region’s 
banking and business community. 
The Fed has two related jobs. The first is to regulate banks and ensure the health 
of the banking system. This task is largely the responsibility of the regional Federal 
Reserve Banks. In particular, the Fed monitors each bank’s financial condition and 
facilitates bank transactions by clearing checks. It also acts as a bank’s bank. That 
is, the Fed makes loans to b
--- PAGE 640 ---
CHAPTER 29   THE MONETARY SYSTEM
government bond is a certificate of indebtedness of the federal government.) If 
the FOMC decides to increase the money supply, the Fed creates dollars and uses 
them to buy government bonds from the public in the nation’s bond markets. 
After the purchase, these dollars are in the hands of the public. Thus, an open-
market purchase of bonds by the Fed increases the money supply. Conversely, if 
the FOMC decides to decrease the money supply, the Fed sells government bonds 
from its portfolio to the public in the nation’s bond markets. After the sale, the 
dollars the Fed receives for the bonds are out of the hands of the public. Thus, an 
open-market sale of bonds by the Fed decreases the money supply.
Central banks are important institutions because changes in the money 
supply can profoundly affect the economy. One of the Ten Principles of Economics
introduced in Chapter 1 is that prices rise when the government prints too much 
money. Another of the Ten Principles of Economics is that society faces a short-run 
trade-off between inflation and unemployment. The power of the Fed rests on 
these principles. For reasons we discuss more fully in the coming chapters, the 
Fed’s policy decisions are key determinants of the economy’s rate of inflation in 
the long run and the economy’s employment and production in the short run. 
Indeed, the Fed’s ch
--- PAGE 641 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
the bank keeps the money in its vault until the depositor withdraws it, writes 
a check, or uses a debit card to access her balance. Deposits that banks have 
received but have not loaned out are called reserves. In this imaginary economy, 
all deposits are held as reserves, so this system is called 100-percent-reserve 
We can express the financial position of First National Bank with a T-account, 
which is a simplified accounting statement that shows changes in a bank’s assets 
and liabilities. Here is the T-account for First National Bank if the economy’s 
entire $100 of money is deposited in the bank: 
On the left side of the T-account are the bank’s assets of $100 (the reserves it holds 
in its vaults). On the right side are the bank’s liabilities of $100 (the amount it 
owes to its depositors). Because the assets and liabilities exactly balance, this 
accounting statement is called a balance sheet. 
Now consider the money supply in this imaginary economy. Before First 
National Bank opens, the money supply is the $100 of currency that people are 
holding. After the bank opens and people deposit their currency, the money supply 
is the $100 of demand deposits. (There is no longer any currency outstanding, 
since it is all in the bank vault.) Each deposit in the bank reduces currency and 
raises demand deposits by exactly the same am
--- PAGE 642 ---
CHAPTER 29   THE MONETARY SYSTEM
Let’s suppose that First National has a reserve ratio of 1/10, or 10 percent. This 
means that it keeps 10 percent of its deposits in reserve and loans out the rest. 
Now let’s look again at the bank’s T-account:
First National still has $100 in liabilities because making the loans did not alter the 
bank’s obligation to its depositors. But now the bank has two kinds of assets: It has $10 
of reserves in its vault, and it has loans of $90. (These loans are liabilities of the people 
borrowing from First National, but they are assets of the bank because the borrowers 
will later repay the loans.) In total, First National’s assets still equal its liabilities.
Once again consider the supply of money in the economy. Before First National 
makes any loans, the money supply is the $100 of deposits. Yet when First National 
lends out some of these deposits, the money supply increases. The depositors still 
have demand deposits totaling $100, but now the borrowers hold $90 in currency. 
The money supply (which equals currency plus demand deposits) equals $190. Thus, 
when banks hold only a fraction of deposits in reserve, the banking system creates money.
At first, this creation of money by fractional-reserve banking may seem too 
good to be true: It appears that the bank has created money out of thin air. To 
make this feat seem less miraculous, note t
--- PAGE 643 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
10 percent, this bank keeps $8.10 in reserve and makes $72.90 in loans. Here is the 
T-account for Third National Bank: 
The process goes on and on. Each time that money is deposited and a bank loan is 
made, more money is created.
How much money is eventually created in this economy? Let’s add it up:
Original deposit                 5 $100.00
First National lending   5 $ 90.00 (5 .9 3 $100.00)
Second National lending 5 $ 81.00 (5 .9 × $90.00)
Third National lending      5 $ 72.90 (5 .9 3 $81.00)
       ___________________________        
It turns out that even though this process of money creation can continue forever, 
it does not create an infinite amount of money. If you laboriously add the infinite 
sequence of numbers in the preceding example, you find that the $100 of reserves 
generates $1,000 of money. The amount of money the banking system generates 
with each dollar of reserves is called the money multiplier. In this imaginary 
economy, where the $100 of reserves generates $1,000 of money, the money 
What determines the size of the money multiplier? It turns out that the answer 
is simple: The money multiplier is the reciprocal of the reserve ratio. If R is the reserve 
ratio for all banks in the economy, then each dollar of reserves generates 1/R 
dollars of money. In our example, R = 1/10, so the money multiplier is 10.
Thi
--- PAGE 644 ---
CHAPTER 29   THE MONETARY SYSTEM
29-3d  Bank Capital, Leverage, and the Financial Crisis  
In the previous sections, we have seen a simplified explanation of how banks 
work. But the reality of modern banking is a bit more complicated, and these 
complications played a key role in the financial crisis of 2008 and 2009. Before 
looking at that crisis, we need to learn a bit more about how banks actually 
In the bank balance sheets you have seen so far, a bank accepts deposits 
and either uses those deposits to make loans or holds them as reserves. More 
realistically, a bank gets financial resources not only from accepting deposits but 
also, like other companies, from issuing equity and debt. The resources that a 
bank obtains from issuing equity to its owners are called bank capital. A bank 
uses these financial resources in various ways to generate profit for its owners. It 
not only makes loans and holds reserves but also buys financial securities, such as 
Here is a more realistic example of a bank’s balance sheet:
More Realistic National Bank
Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
On the right side of this balance sheet are the bank’s liabilities and capital (also 
called owners’ equity). This bank obtained $50 of resources from its owners. It also 
took in $800 of deposits and issued $150 of debt. The total of $1,000 was put to use 
in three ways; these are listed on the left sid
--- PAGE 645 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
$20 of assets. Of the $20 of assets, $19 are financed with borrowed money—either 
by taking in deposits or issuing debt.
You may have learned in a science class that a lever can amplify a force: 
A boulder that you cannot move with your arms alone will move more easily 
if you use a lever. A similar result occurs with bank leverage. To see how this 
amplification works, let’s continue with this numerical example. Suppose that the 
bank’s assets were to rise in value by 5 percent because, say, some of the securities 
the bank was holding rose in price. Then the $1,000 of assets would now be 
worth $1,050. Because the depositors and debt holders are still owed $950, the 
bank capital rises from $50 to $100. Thus, when the leverage rate is 20, a 5-percent 
increase in the value of assets increases the owners’ equity by 100 percent.
The same principle works on the downside, but with troubling consequences. 
Suppose that some people who borrowed from the bank default on their loans, 
reducing the value of the bank’s assets by 5 percent, to $950. Because the depositors 
and debt holders have the legal right to be paid before the bank owners, the value 
of the owners’ equity falls to zero. Thus, when the leverage ratio is 20, a 5-percent 
fall in the value of the bank’s assets leads to a 100-percent fall in bank capital. If 
the value of asset
--- PAGE 646 ---
CHAPTER 29   THE MONETARY SYSTEM
The Fed has various tools in its monetary toolbox. We can group the tools into 
two groups: those that influence the quantity of reserves and those that influence 
the reserve ratio and thereby the money multiplier.
29-4a How the Fed Influences the Quantity of Reserves
The first way the Fed can change the money supply is by changing the quantity of 
reserves. The Fed alters the quantity of reserves in the economy either by buying 
or selling bonds in open-market operations or by making loans to banks (or by 
some combination of the two). Let’s consider each of these in turn.
Open-Market Operations  As we noted earlier, the Fed conducts open-market 
operations when it buys or sells government bonds. To increase the money sup-
ply, the Fed instructs its bond traders at the New York Fed to buy bonds from 
the public in the nation’s bond markets. The dollars the Fed pays for the bonds 
increase the number of dollars in the economy. Some of these new dollars are held 
as currency, and some are deposited in banks. Each new dollar held as currency 
increases the money supply by exactly $1. Each new dollar deposited in a bank in-
creases the money supply by more than a dollar because it increases reserves and, 
thereby, the amount of money that the banking system can create.
To reduce the money supply, the Fed does just the opposite: It sells government
--- PAGE 647 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
At times, the Fed has set up other mechanisms for banks to borrow from it. For 
example, from 2007 to 2010, under the Term Auction Facility, the Fed set a quantity 
of funds it wanted to lend to banks, and eligible banks then bid to borrow those 
funds. The loans went to the highest eligible bidders—that is, to the banks that 
had acceptable collateral and offered to pay the highest interest rate. Unlike at the 
discount window, where the Fed sets the price of a loan and the banks determine 
the quantity of borrowing, at the Term Auction Facility the Fed set the quantity of 
borrowing and competitive bidding among banks determined the price. The more 
funds the Fed made available, the greater the quantity of reserves and the larger 
The Fed lends to banks not only to control the money supply but also to help 
financial institutions when they are in trouble. For example, when the stock 
market crashed by 22 percent on October 19, 1987, many Wall Street brokerage 
firms found themselves temporarily in need of funds to finance the high volume 
of stock trading. The next morning, before the stock market opened, Fed Chair 
Alan Greenspan announced the Fed’s “readiness to serve as a source of liquidity 
to support the economic and financial system.” Many economists believe that 
Greenspan’s reaction to the stock crash was an important reason 
--- PAGE 648 ---
CHAPTER 29   THE MONETARY SYSTEM
Paying Interest on Reserves  Traditionally, banks did not earn any interest on the 
reserves they held. In October 2008, however, the Fed began paying interest on 
reserves. That is, when a bank holds reserves on deposit at the Fed, the Fed now 
pays the bank interest on those deposits. This change gives the Fed another tool 
with which to influence the economy. The higher the interest rate on reserves, the 
more reserves banks will choose to hold. Thus, an increase in the interest rate on 
reserves will tend to increase the reserve ratio, lower the money multiplier, and 
29-4c Problems in Controlling the Money Supply
The Fed’s various tools—open-market operations, bank lending, reserve 
requirements, and interest on reserves—have powerful effects on the money 
supply. Yet the Fed’s control of the money supply is not precise. The Fed must 
wrestle with two problems, each of which arises because much of the money 
supply is created by our system of fractional-reserve banking. 
The first problem is that the Fed does not control the amount of money that 
households choose to hold as deposits in banks. The more money households 
deposit, the more reserves banks have, and the more money the banking system 
can create. The less money households deposit, the less reserves banks have, 
and the less money the banking system can create. To see why this is
--- PAGE 649 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
requests from all depositors. Even if the bank is solvent (meaning that its assets 
exceed its liabilities), it will not have enough cash on hand to allow all depositors 
immediate access to all of their money. When a run occurs, the bank is forced to 
close its doors until some bank loans are repaid or until some lender of last resort 
(such as the Fed) provides it with the currency it needs to satisfy depositors.
Bank runs complicate the control of the money supply. An important example of 
this problem occurred during the Great Depression in the early 1930s. After a wave 
of bank runs and bank closings, households and bankers became more cautious. 
Households withdrew their deposits from banks, preferring to hold their money 
in the form of currency. This decision reversed the process of money creation, as 
bankers responded to falling reserves by reducing bank loans. At the same time, 
bankers increased their reserve ratios so that they would have enough cash on hand 
to meet their depositors’ demands in any future bank runs. The higher reserve ratio 
reduced the money multiplier, which further reduced the money supply. From 1929 
to 1933, the money supply fell by 28 percent, without the Federal Reserve taking 
any deliberate contractionary action. Many economists point to this massive fall 
in the money supply to explain the high u
--- PAGE 650 ---
CHAPTER 29   THE MONETARY SYSTEM
Today, bank runs are not a major problem for the U.S. banking system or the Fed. 
The federal government now guarantees the safety of deposits at most banks, primarily 
through the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Depositors do not make 
runs on their banks because they are confident that, even if their bank goes bankrupt, 
the FDIC will make good on the deposits. The policy of government deposit insurance 
has costs: Bankers whose deposits are guaranteed may have too little incentive to 
avoid bad risks when making loans. But one benefit of deposit insurance is a more 
stable banking system. As a result, most people see bank runs only in the movies. ●
29-4d The Federal Funds Rate
If you read about U.S. monetary policy in the newspaper, you will find much 
discussion of the federal funds rate. This raises several questions:
What is the federal funds rate?
 The federal funds rate is the short-term interest rate that banks charge one 
another for loans. If one bank finds itself short of reserves while another 
bank has excess reserves, the second bank can lend some reserves to the 
first. The loans are temporary—typically overnight. The price of the loan is 
the interest rate at which 
New York. A light snow was falling, muting the 
hushed, conspiratorial tones of his guests, 
which is exactly how Aldrich wanted it.
The reform-minded 
--- PAGE 651 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
How is the federal funds rate different from the discount rate?
 The discount rate is the interest rate banks pay to borrow directly from 
the Federal Reserve through the discount window. Borrowing reserves 
from  another bank in the federal funds market is an alternative to borrow-
ing  reserves from the Fed, and a bank short of reserves will typically do 
 whichever is cheaper. In practice, the discount rate and the federal funds 
rate move closely together.
Does the federal funds rate matter only for banks?
 Not at all. Although only banks borrow directly in the federal funds market, 
the economic impact of this market is much broader. Because different parts 
of the financial system are highly interconnected, interest rates on different 
kinds of loans are strongly correlated with one another. So when the federal 
funds rate rises or falls, other interest rates often move in the same direction.
What does the Federal Reserve have to do with the federal funds rate?
 In recent years, the Federal Reserve has set a target goal for the federal funds 
rate. When the Federal Open Market Committee meets approximately  every 
6 weeks, it decides whether to raise or lower that target. 
How can the Fed make the federal funds rate hit the target it sets?
 Although the actual federal funds rate is set by supply and demand in the 
market for loans
--- PAGE 652 ---
CHAPTER 29   THE MONETARY SYSTEM
1. The money supply includes all of the following 
c. lines of credit accessible with credit cards.
d. bank balances accessible with debit cards.
2. Chloe takes $100 of currency from her wallet and 
deposits it into her checking account. If the bank 
adds the entire $100 to reserves, the money sup-
ply ________, but if the bank lends out some of the 
$100, the money supply ________.
a. increases, increases even more
b. increases, increases by less
c. is unchanged, increases
d. decreases, decreases by less
3. If the reserve ratio is ¼ and the central bank  
increases the quantity of reserves in the banking  
system by $120, the money supply increases by
4. A bank has capital of $200 and a leverage ratio of 5. 
If the value of the bank’s assets declines by 10 per-
cent, then its capital will be reduced to
5. Which of the following actions by the Fed would  
a. an open-market purchase of government bonds
b. a reduction in banks’ reserve requirements
c. an increase in the interest rate paid on reserves
d. a decrease in the discount rate on Fed lending
6. In a system of fractional-reserve banking, even with-
out any action by the central bank, the money sup-
ply declines if households choose to hold ________ 
currency or if banks choose to hold ________ excess 
r The term money refers to assets that people regularly 
use to buy goods and services.
r
--- PAGE 653 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
medium of exchange, p. 605
Federal Reserve (Fed), p. 609
fractional-reserve banking, p. 612
capital requirement, p. 616
open-market operations, p. 617
reserve requirements, p. 618
federal funds rate, p. 621
1. What distinguishes money from other assets in the 
2. What is commodity money? What is fiat money? 
3. What are demand deposits and why should they be 
included in the stock of money?
4. Who is responsible for setting monetary policy in the 
United States? How is this group chosen?
5. If the Fed wants to increase the money supply with 
open-market operations, what does it do?
6. Why don’t banks hold 100-percent reserves? How 
is the amount of reserves banks hold related to the 
amount of money the banking system creates?
7. Bank A has a leverage ratio of 10, while Bank B has 
a leverage ratio of 20. Similar losses on bank loans at 
the two banks cause the value of their assets to fall by 
7 percent. Which bank shows a larger change in bank 
capital? Does either bank remain solvent? Explain.
8. What is the discount rate? What happens to the 
money supply when the Fed raises the discount rate?
9. What are reserve requirements? What happens 
to the money supply when the Fed raises reserve 
10. Why can’t the Fed control the money supply 
1. Which of the following are considered money in the 
U.S. economy? Which are not? Explain your a
--- PAGE 654 ---
CHAPTER 29   THE MONETARY SYSTEM
3. Your uncle repays a $100 loan from Tenth National 
Bank (TNB) by writing a $100 check from his TNB 
checking account. Use T-accounts to show the effect of 
this transaction on your uncle and on TNB. Has your 
uncle’s wealth changed? Explain.
4. Beleaguered State Bank (BSB) holds $250 million in 
deposits and maintains a reserve ratio of 10 percent.
a. Show a T-account for BSB.
b. Now suppose that BSB’s largest depositor 
withdraws $10 million in cash from her account. If 
BSB decides to restore its reserve ratio by reducing 
the amount of loans outstanding, show its new 
c. Explain what effect BSB’s action will have on 
d. Why might it be difficult for BSB to take the action 
described in part (b)? Discuss another way for BSB 
to return to its original reserve ratio.
5. You take $100 you had kept under your mattress and 
deposit it in your bank account. If this $100 stays in 
the banking system as reserves and if banks hold 
reserves equal to 10 percent of deposits, by how much 
does the total amount of deposits in the banking 
system increase? By how much does the money 
6. Happy Bank starts with $200 in bank capital. It then 
accepts $800 in deposits. It keeps 12.5 percent (1/8th) 
of deposits in reserve. It uses the rest of its assets to 
a. Show the balance sheet of Happy Bank.
b. What is Happy Bank’s leverage ratio?
c. Suppose that 10 pe
--- PAGE 655 ---

--- PAGE 656 ---
Money Growth and Inflation
oday, if you want to buy an ice-cream cone, you need at least a couple of 
dollars, but that has not always been the case. In the 1930s, my grandmother 
ran a sweet shop in Trenton, New Jersey, where she sold ice-cream cones in 
two sizes. A cone with a small scoop of ice cream cost 3 cents. Hungry customers 
could buy a large scoop for a nickel.
You may not be surprised at the increase in the price of ice cream. In most 
modern economies, most prices tend to rise over time. This increase in the overall 
level of prices is called inflation. Earlier in the book, we examined how economists 
