--- PAGE 656 ---
Money Growth and Inflation
oday, if you want to buy an ice-cream cone, you need at least a couple of 
dollars, but that has not always been the case. In the 1930s, my grandmother 
ran a sweet shop in Trenton, New Jersey, where she sold ice-cream cones in 
two sizes. A cone with a small scoop of ice cream cost 3 cents. Hungry customers 
could buy a large scoop for a nickel.
You may not be surprised at the increase in the price of ice cream. In most 
modern economies, most prices tend to rise over time. This increase in the overall 
level of prices is called inflation. Earlier in the book, we examined how economists 
--- PAGE 657 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
measure the inflation rate as the percentage change in the consumer price 
index (CPI), the GDP deflator, or some other index of the overall price level. 
These price indexes show that, in the United States over the past 80 years, prices 
have risen on average 3.6 percent per year. Accumulated over so many years, a 3.6 
percent annual inflation rate leads to a seventeenfold increase in the price level. 
Inflation may seem natural and inevitable to a person who grew up in 
the United States during recent decades, but in fact, it is not inevitable at all. 
There were long periods in the 19th century during which most prices fell—a 
 phenomenon called deflation. The average level of prices in the U.S. economy was 
23 percent lower in 1896 than in 1880, and this deflation was a major issue in 
the presidential election of 1896. Farmers, who had accumulated large debts, suf-
fered when declines in crop prices reduced their incomes and thus their ability to 
pay off their debts. They advocated government policies to reverse the deflation.
Although inflation has been the norm in more recent history, there has been 
substantial variation in the rate at which prices rise. From 2005 to 2015, prices 
rose at an average rate of 1.2 percent per year. By contrast, in the 1970s, prices rose 
by 7.8 percent per year, which meant the price level more th
--- PAGE 658 ---
CHAPTER 30   MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION
30-1 The Classical Theory of Inflation
We begin our study of inflation by developing the quantity theory of money. This 
theory is often called “classical” because it was developed by some of the earliest 
economic thinkers. Most economists today rely on this theory to explain the long-
run determinants of the price level and the inflation rate.
30-1a The Level of Prices and the Value of Money
Suppose we observe that over some period of time the price of an ice-cream cone 
rises from a nickel to a dollar. What conclusion should we draw from the fact 
that people are willing to give up so much more money in exchange for a cone? 
It is possible that people have come to enjoy ice cream more (perhaps because 
some chemist has developed a miraculous new flavor). But that is probably not 
the case. It is more likely that people’s enjoyment of ice cream has stayed roughly 
the same and that, over time, the money used to buy ice cream has become less 
valuable. Indeed, the first insight about inflation is that it is more about the value 
of money than about the value of goods. 
This insight helps point the way toward a theory of inflation. When the 
consumer price index and other measures of the price level rise, commentators 
are often tempted to look at the many individual prices that make up these price 
indexes: “The CPI rose by 3 percent las
--- PAGE 659 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
30-1b Money Supply, Money Demand, and Monetary Equilibrium
What determines the value of money? The answer to this question, like many in 
economics, is supply and demand. Just as the supply and demand for bananas 
determines the price of bananas, the supply and demand for money determines 
the value of money. Thus, our next step in developing the quantity theory of 
money is to consider the determinants of money supply and money demand.
First consider money supply. In the preceding chapter, we discussed how the 
Federal Reserve, together with the banking system, determines the supply of 
money. When the Fed sells bonds in open-market operations, it receives dollars in 
exchange and contracts the money supply. When the Fed buys government bonds, 
it pays out dollars and expands the money supply. In addition, if any of these 
dollars are deposited in banks, which hold some as reserves and loan out the rest, 
the money multiplier swings into action, and these open-market operations can 
have an even greater effect on the money supply. For our purposes in this chapter, 
we ignore the complications introduced by the banking system and simply take 
the quantity of money supplied as a policy variable that the Fed controls.
Now consider money demand. Most fundamentally, the demand for money 
reflects how much wealth people want to hold in liqui
--- PAGE 660 ---
CHAPTER 30   MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION
The two curves in this figure are the supply and demand curves for money. The 
supply curve is vertical because the Fed has fixed the quantity of money available. 
The demand curve for money slopes downward, indicating that when the value 
of money is low (and the price level is high), people demand a larger quantity of 
it to buy goods and services. At the equilibrium, shown in the figure as point A, 
the quantity of money demanded balances the quantity of money supplied. This 
equilibrium of money supply and money demand determines the value of money 
30-1c The Effects of a Monetary Injection
Let’s now consider the effects of a change in monetary policy. To do so, imagine 
that the economy is in equilibrium and then, suddenly, the Fed doubles the supply 
of money by printing some dollar bills and dropping them around the country 
from helicopters. (Or, less dramatically and more realistically, the Fed could inject 
money into the economy by buying some government bonds from the public in 
open-market operations.) What happens after such a monetary injection? How 
does the new equilibrium compare to the old one?
Figure 2 shows what happens. The monetary injection shifts the supply curve 
to the right from MS1 to MS2, and the equilibrium moves from point A to point B. 
As a result, the value of money (shown on the left axis) decreases fro
--- PAGE 661 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
30-1d A Brief Look at the Adjustment Process
So far, we have compared the old equilibrium and the new equilibrium after 
an injection of money. How does the economy move from the old to the new 
equilibrium? A complete answer to this question requires an understanding 
of short-run fluctuations in the economy, which we examine later in this book. 
Here, we briefly consider the adjustment process that occurs after a change in the 
The immediate effect of a monetary injection is to create an excess supply of 
money. Before the injection, the economy was in equilibrium (point A in Figure 2). 
At the prevailing price level, people had exactly as much money as they wanted. 
But after the helicopters drop the new money and people pick it up off the streets, 
people have more dollars in their wallets than they want. At the prevailing price 
level, the quantity of money supplied now exceeds the quantity demanded.
People try to get rid of this excess supply of money in various ways. They 
might use it to buy goods and services. Or they might use this excess money 
to make loans to others by buying bonds or by depositing the money in a bank 
savings account. These loans allow other people to buy goods and services. In 
either case, the injection of money increases the demand for goods and services.
The economy’s ability to supply goods and servic
--- PAGE 662 ---
CHAPTER 30   MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION
In this way, the overall price level for goods and services adjusts to bring money 
supply and money demand into balance.
30-1e The Classical Dichotomy and Monetary Neutrality
We have seen how changes in the money supply lead to changes in the average 
level of prices of goods and services. How do monetary changes affect other 
economic variables, such as production, employment, real wages, and real interest 
rates? This question has long intrigued economists, including David Hume in the 
Hume and his contemporaries suggested that economic variables should be 
divided into two groups. The first group consists of nominal variables—variables 
measured in monetary units. The second group consists of real variables—
variables measured in physical units. For example, the income of corn farmers 
is a nominal variable because it is measured in dollars, whereas the quantity of 
corn they produce is a real variable because it is measured in bushels. Nominal 
GDP is a nominal variable because it measures the dollar value of the economy’s 
output of goods and services; real GDP is a real variable because it measures the 
total quantity of goods and services produced and is not influenced by the current 
prices of those goods and services. The separation of real and nominal variables 
is now called the classical dichotomy. (A dichotomy is a division 
--- PAGE 663 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
price level doubles, the dollar wage doubles, and all other dollar values double. 
Real variables, such as production, employment, real wages, and real interest 
rates, are unchanged. The irrelevance of monetary changes for real variables is 
called monetary neutrality. 
An analogy helps explain monetary neutrality. As the unit of account, money 
is the yardstick we use to measure economic transactions. When a central bank 
doubles the money supply, all prices double, and the value of the unit of account 
falls by half. A similar change would occur if the government were to reduce 
the length of the yard from 36 to 18 inches: With the new, shorter yardstick, all 
measured distances (nominal variables) would double, but the actual distances 
(real variables) would remain the same. The dollar, like the yard, is merely a unit 
of measurement, so a change in its value should not have real effects.
Is monetary neutrality realistic? Not completely. A change in the length of the 
yard from 36 to 18 inches would not matter in the long run, but in the short run, it 
would lead to confusion and mistakes. Similarly, most economists today believe 
that over short periods of time—within the span of a year or two—monetary 
changes affect real variables. Hume himself also doubted that monetary neutrality 
would apply in the short run. (We will study s
--- PAGE 664 ---
CHAPTER 30   MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION
With slight algebraic rearrangement, this equation can be rewritten as
This equation states that the quantity of money (M) times the velocity of money 
(V) equals the price of output (P) times the amount of output (Y). It is called the 
quantity equation because it relates the quantity of money (M) to the nominal 
value of output (P 3 Y). The quantity equation shows that an increase in the 
quantity of money in an economy must be reflected in one of the other three 
variables: The price level must rise, the quantity of output must rise, or the 
velocity of money must fall.
In many cases, it turns out that the velocity of money is relatively stable. For 
example, Figure 3 shows nominal GDP, the quantity of money (as measured by 
M2), and the velocity of money for the U.S. economy since 1960. During this 
period, the money supply and nominal GDP both increased more than thirtyfold. 
By contrast, the velocity of money, although not exactly constant, has not changed 
Nominal GDP, the Quantity 
of Money, and the Velocity 
This figure shows the nominal value of output as measured by nominal GDP, the quantity 
of money as measured by M2, and the velocity of money as measured by their ratio. For 
comparability, all three series have been scaled to equal 100 in 1960. Notice that nominal 
GDP and the quantity of money have grown dramatically over t
--- PAGE 665 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
dramatically. Thus, for some purposes, the assumption of constant velocity is a 
We now have all the elements necessary to explain the equilibrium price level 
and inflation rate. They are as follows:
1. The velocity of money is relatively stable over time.
2. Because velocity is stable, when the central bank changes the quantity of 
money (M), it causes proportionate changes in the nominal value of output  
 3. The economy’s output of goods and services (Y) is primarily determined by 
factor supplies (labor, physical capital, human capital, and natural resources) 
and the available production technology. In particular, because money is  
neutral, money does not affect output.
 4. With output (Y) determined by factor supplies and technology, when the  
central bank alters the money supply (M) and induces proportional changes in 
the nominal value of output (P 3 Y), these changes are reflected in changes in 
 5. Therefore, when the central bank increases the money supply rapidly, the  
result is a high rate of inflation.
These five steps are the essence of the quantity theory of money. 
MONEY AND PRICES DURING FOUR HYPERINFLATIONS
Although earthquakes can wreak havoc on a society, they have 
the beneficial by-product of providing much useful data for 
seismologists. These data can shed light on alternative theories and, 
thereby, help so
--- PAGE 666 ---
CHAPTER 30   MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION
If inflation is so easy to explain, why do countries experience hyperinflation? That 
is, why do the central banks of these countries choose to print so much money 
that its value is certain to fall rapidly over time?
The answer is that the governments of these countries are using money creation 
as a way to pay for their spending. When the government wants to build roads, 
pay salaries to its soldiers, or give transfer payments to the poor or elderly, it first 
has to raise the necessary funds. Normally, the government does this by levying 
taxes, such as income and sales taxes, and by borrowing from the public by selling 
government bonds. Yet the government can also pay for spending simply by 
printing the money it needs. 
When the government raises revenue by printing money, it is said to levy an 
inflation tax. The inflation tax is not exactly like other taxes, however, because no 
one receives a bill from the government for this tax. Instead, the inflation tax is 
This figure shows the quantity of money and the price level during four hyperinflations. 
(Note that these variables are graphed on logarithmic scales. This means that equal vertical 
distances on the graph represent equal percentage changes in the variable.) In each case, the 
quantity of money and the price level move closely together. The strong association between 
the
--- PAGE 667 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
subtler. When the government prints money, the price level rises, and the dollars 
in your wallet become less valuable. Thus, the inflation tax is like a tax on everyone 
The importance of the inflation tax varies from country to country and over time. 
In the United States in recent years, the inflation tax has been a trivial source of 
revenue: It has accounted for less than 3 percent of government revenue. During 
the 1770s, however, the Continental Congress of the fledgling United States 
relied heavily on the inflation tax to pay for military spending. Because the new 
government had a limited ability to raise funds through regular taxes or borrowing, 
printing dollars was the easiest way to pay the American soldiers. As the quantity 
theory predicts, the result was a high rate of inflation: Prices measured in terms of 
the continental dollar rose more than a 100-fold over a few years.
Almost all hyperinflations follow the same pattern as the hyperinflation during 
the American Revolution. The government has high spending, inadequate tax 
revenue, and limited ability to borrow. As a result, it turns to the printing press to 
pay for its spending. The massive increases in the quantity of money lead to massive 
inflation. The inflation ends when the government institutes fiscal reforms—such as 
cuts in government spending—that elimin
--- PAGE 668 ---
CHAPTER 30   MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION
According to the principle of monetary neutrality, an increase in the rate of 
money growth raises the rate of inflation but does not affect any real variable. An 
important application of this principle concerns the effect of money on interest 
rates. Interest rates are important variables for macroeconomists to understand 
because they link the economy of the present and the economy of the future 
through their effects on saving and investment.
To understand the relationship between money, inflation, and interest rates, 
recall the distinction between the nominal interest rate and the real interest rate. 
The nominal interest rate is the interest rate you hear about at your bank. If you 
have a savings account, for instance, the nominal interest rate tells you how fast 
the number of dollars in your account will rise over time. The real interest rate
corrects the nominal interest rate for the effect of inflation to tell you how fast the 
purchasing power of your savings account will rise over time. The real interest 
rate is the nominal interest rate minus the inflation rate:
Real interest rate 5 Nominal interest rate 2 Inflation rate.
For example, if the bank posts a nominal interest rate of 7 percent per year and the 
inflation rate is 3 percent per year, then the real value of the deposits grows by 4 
We can rewrite this equation to 
--- PAGE 669 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
the U.S. economy since 1960. The close association between these two variables 
is clear. The nominal interest rate rose from the early 1960s through the 1970s 
because inflation was also rising during this time. Similarly, the nominal interest 
rate fell from the early 1980s through the 1990s because the Fed got inflation 
under control. In recent years, both the nominal interest rate and the inflation rate 
have been low by historical standards. 
The government of a country increases the growth rate of the money 
supply from 5 percent per year to 50 percent per year. What happens to 
prices? What happens to nominal interest rates? Why might the government be doing this?
The Nominal Interest Rate 
This figure uses annual data since 1960 to show the nominal interest rate on three-month 
Treasury bills and the inflation rate as measured by the consumer price index. The close 
association between these two variables is evidence for the Fisher effect: When the inflation 
rate rises, so does the nominal interest rate.
Source: U.S. Department of Treasury; U.S. Department of Labor.
30-2 The Costs of Inflation
In the late 1970s, when the U.S. inflation rate reached about 10 percent per year, 
inflation dominated debates over economic policy. And even though inflation 
has been low over the past 20 years, it remains a closely watched macroecono
--- PAGE 670 ---
CHAPTER 30   MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION
30-2a A Fall in Purchasing Power? The Inflation Fallacy
If you ask the typical person why inflation is bad, he will tell you that the answer 
is obvious: Inflation robs him of the purchasing power of his hard-earned dollars. 
When prices rise, each dollar of income buys fewer goods and services. Thus, it 
might seem that inflation directly lowers living standards. 
Yet further thought reveals a fallacy in this answer. When prices rise, buyers of goods 
and services pay more for what they buy. At the same time, however, sellers of goods 
and services get more for what they sell. Because most people earn their incomes by 
selling their services, such as their labor, inflation in incomes goes hand in hand with 
inflation in prices. Thus, inflation does not in itself reduce people’s real purchasing power.
People believe the inflation fallacy because they do not appreciate the principle 
of monetary neutrality. A worker who receives an annual raise of 10 percent tends 
to view that raise as a reward for his own talent and effort. When an inflation rate of 
6 percent reduces the real value of that raise to only 4 percent, the worker might feel 
that he has been cheated of what is rightfully his due. In fact, as we discussed in the 
chapter on production and growth, real incomes are determined by real variables, 
such as physical capital, human 
--- PAGE 671 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
person’s experience in Bolivia during its hyperinflation (as reported in the August 
13, 1985, issue of The Wall Street Journal):
When Edgar Miranda gets his monthly teacher’s pay of 25 million pesos, he 
hasn’t a moment to lose. Every hour, pesos drop in value. So, while his wife 
rushes to market to lay in a month’s supply of rice and noodles, he is off 
with the rest of the pesos to change them into black-market dollars.
Mr. Miranda is practicing the First Rule of Survival amid the most 
out-of-control inflation in the world today. Bolivia is a case study of how 
runaway inflation undermines a society. Price increases are so huge that 
the figures build up almost beyond comprehension. In one six-month 
period, for example, prices soared at an annual rate of 38,000 percent. By 
official count, however, last year’s inflation reached 2,000 percent, and this 
year’s is expected to hit 8,000 percent—though other estimates range many 
times higher. In any event, Bolivia’s rate dwarfs Israel’s 370 percent and 
Argentina’s 1,100 percent—two other cases of severe inflation.
It is easier to comprehend what happens to the thirty-eight-year-old 
Mr. Miranda’s pay if he doesn’t quickly change it into dollars. The day he 
was paid 25 million pesos, a dollar cost 500,000 pesos. So he received $50. 
Just days later, with the rate at 900,000 pesos, h
--- PAGE 672 ---
CHAPTER 30   MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION
economy—would be constant over the course of the year. By contrast, if the 
inflation rate is 12 percent per year, Eatabit’s relative prices will automatically 
fall by 1 percent each month. The restaurant’s relative prices will be high in the 
early months of the year, just after it has printed a new menu, and low in the later 
months. And the higher the inflation rate, the greater is this automatic variability. 
Thus, because prices change only once in a while, inflation causes relative prices 
to vary more than they otherwise would.
Why does this matter? The reason is that market economies rely on relative 
prices to allocate scarce resources. Consumers decide what to buy by comparing 
the quality and prices of various goods and services. Through these decisions, 
they determine how the scarce factors of production are allocated among 
industries and firms. When inflation distorts relative prices, consumer decisions 
are distorted and markets are less able to allocate resources to their best use.
30-2e Inflation-Induced Tax Distortions
Almost all taxes distort incentives, cause people to alter their behavior, and lead 
to a less efficient allocation of the economy’s resources. Many taxes, however, 
become even more problematic in the presence of inflation. The reason is that 
lawmakers often fail to take inflation into account when wri
--- PAGE 673 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
discourage people from saving. Recall that the economy’s saving provides the 
resources for investment, which in turn is a key ingredient to long-run economic 
growth. Thus, when inflation raises the tax burden on saving, it tends to depress 
the economy’s long-run growth rate. There is, however, no consensus among 
economists about the size of this effect.
One solution to this problem, other than eliminating inflation, is to index the 
tax system. That is, the tax laws could be rewritten to take account of the effects 
of inflation. In the case of capital gains, for example, the tax code could adjust 
the purchase price using a price index and assess the tax only on the real gain. In 
the case of interest income, the government could tax only real interest income 
by excluding that portion of the interest income that merely compensates for 
inflation. To some extent, the tax laws have moved in the direction of indexation. 
For example, the income levels at which income tax rates change are adjusted 
automatically each year based on changes in the consumer price index. Yet many 
other aspects of the tax laws—such as the tax treatment of capital gains and 
interest income—are not indexed.
In an ideal world, the tax laws would be written so that inflation would not 
alter anyone’s real tax liability. In the real world, however, tax laws a
--- PAGE 674 ---
CHAPTER 30   MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION
Standards—to ensure the reliability of a commonly used unit of measurement. 
When the Fed increases the money supply and creates inflation, it erodes the real 
value of the unit of account.
It is difficult to judge the costs of the confusion and inconvenience that arise 
from inflation. Earlier, we discussed how the tax code incorrectly measures real 
incomes in the presence of inflation. Similarly, accountants incorrectly measure 
firms’ earnings when prices are rising over time. Because inflation causes dollars 
at different times to have different real values, computing a firm’s profit—the 
difference between its revenue and costs—is more complicated in an economy 
with inflation. Therefore, to some extent, inflation makes investors less able to 
sort successful from unsuccessful firms, which in turn impedes financial markets 
in their role of allocating the economy’s saving to alternative types of investment. 
30-2g  A Special Cost of Unexpected Inflation: Arbitrary 
So far, the costs of inflation we have discussed occur even if inflation is steady and 
predictable. Inflation has an additional cost, however, when it comes as a surprise. 
Unexpected inflation redistributes wealth among the population in a way that 
has nothing to do with either merit or need. These redistributions occur because 
many loans in the economy are specified 
--- PAGE 675 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
30-2h Inflation Is Bad, but Deflation May Be Worse
In recent U.S. history, inflation has been the norm. But the level of prices has fallen 
at times, such as during the late 19th century and early 1930s. From 1998 to 2012, 
Japan experienced a 4-percent decline in its overall price level. So as we conclude 
our discussion of the costs of inflation, we should briefly consider the costs of 
Some economists have suggested that a small and predictable amount of 
deflation may be desirable. Milton Friedman pointed out that deflation would 
lower the nominal interest rate (via the Fisher effect) and that a lower nominal 
interest rate would reduce the cost of holding money. The shoeleather costs of 
holding money would, he argued, be minimized by a nominal interest rate close 
to zero, which in turn would require deflation equal to the real interest rate. This 
prescription for moderate deflation is called the Friedman rule.
Yet there are also costs of deflation. Some of these mirror the costs of inflation. 
For example, just as a rising price level induces menu costs and relative-price 
variability, so does a falling price level. Moreover, in practice, deflation is rarely 
as steady and predictable as Friedman recommended. More often, it comes as 
a surprise, resulting in the redistribution of wealth toward creditors and away 
from debtors. 
--- PAGE 676 ---
CHAPTER 30   MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION
the Democratic nominee for president in 1896. He is remembered in part for a 
speech at the Democratic Party’s nominating convention in which he said, “You 
shall not press down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns. You shall not 
crucify mankind upon a cross of gold.” Rarely since then have politicians waxed so 
poetic about alternative approaches to monetary policy. Nonetheless, Bryan lost the 
election to Republican William McKinley, and the United States remained on the 
L. Frank Baum, author of the book The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, was a midwestern 
journalist. When he sat down to write a story for children, he made the characters 
represent protagonists in the major political battle of his time. Here is how economic 
historian Hugh Rockoff, writing in the Journal of Political Economy in 1990, interprets 
Traditional American values
Prohibitionist party, also called the Teetotalers
Wicked Witch of the East: 
 Wicked Witch of the West: 
 Marcus Alonzo Hanna, chairman of the  
Abbreviation for ounce of gold
At the end of Baum’s story, Dorothy does find her way home, but it is not by 
just following the yellow brick road. After a long and perilous journey, she learns 
that the wizard is incapable of helping her or her friends. Instead, Dorothy finally 
discovers the magical power of her silver slippers. (When the book was made 
in
--- PAGE 677 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
The costs of inflation are more subtle. They include shoeleather costs, menu 
costs, increased variability of relative prices, unintended changes in tax liabilities, 
confusion and inconvenience, and arbitrary redistributions of wealth. Are these 
costs, in total, large or small? All economists agree that they become huge during 
hyperinflation. But during periods of moderate inflation—when prices rise by 
less than 10 percent per year—the size of these costs is more open to debate.
This chapter presented many of the most important lessons about inflation, 
but the analysis is incomplete. When the central bank reduces the rate of money 
growth, prices rise less rapidly, as the quantity theory suggests. Yet as the economy 
makes the transition to the lower inflation rate, the change in monetary policy will 
likely disrupt production and employment. That is, even though monetary policy 
is neutral in the long run, it has profound effects on real variables in the short 
run. Later in this book we will examine the reasons for short-run monetary non-
neutrality to enhance our understanding of the causes and effects of inflation. 
1. The classical principle of monetary neutrality states 
that changes in the money supply do not influence 
________ variables and is thought most applicable in 
2. If nominal GDP is $400, real GDP is $200, and the
--- PAGE 678 ---
CHAPTER 30   MONEY GROWTH AND INFLATION
r The overall level of prices in an economy adjusts to 
bring money supply and money demand into balance. 
When the central bank increases the supply of money, 
it causes the price level to rise. Persistent growth in 
the quantity of money supplied leads to continuing 
r The principle of monetary neutrality asserts that 
changes in the quantity of money influence nominal 
variables but not real variables. Most economists 
believe that monetary neutrality approximately 
describes the behavior of the economy in the long run.
r A government can pay for some of its spending simply 
by printing money. When countries rely heavily on this 
“inflation tax,” the result is hyperinflation.
r One application of the principle of monetary neutrality 
is the Fisher effect. According to the Fisher effect, when 
the inflation rate rises, the nominal interest rate rises by 
the same amount so that the real interest rate remains 
r Many people think that inflation makes them poorer 
because it raises the cost of what they buy. This view 
is a fallacy, however, because inflation also raises 
r Economists have identified six costs of inflation: 
shoeleather costs associated with reduced money 
holdings, menu costs associated with more frequent 
adjustment of prices, increased variability of relative 
prices, unintended changes in tax liabilities due 
to
--- PAGE 679 ---
PART X   MONEY AND PRICES IN THE LONG RUN
2. Suppose that changes in bank regulations expand the 
availability of credit cards so that people need to hold 
a. How does this event affect the demand for 
b. If the Fed does not respond to this event, what 
will happen to the price level?
c. If the Fed wants to keep the price level stable, 
3. It is sometimes suggested that the Federal Reserve 
should try to achieve zero inflation. If we assume 
that velocity is constant, does this zero-inflation goal 
require that the rate of money growth equal zero? If 
yes, explain why. If no, explain what the rate of money 
4. Suppose that a country’s inflation rate increases 
sharply. What happens to the inflation tax on the 
holders of money? Why is wealth that is held in 
savings accounts not subject to a change in the 
inflation tax? Can you think of any way holders 
of savings accounts are hurt by the increase in the 
5. Let’s consider the effects of inflation in an economy 
composed of only two people: Bob, a bean farmer, and 
Rita, a rice farmer. Bob and Rita both always consume 
equal amounts of rice and beans. In 2016, the price of 
beans was $1 and the price of rice was $3.
a. Suppose that in 2017 the price of beans was $2 
and the price of rice was $6. What was inflation? 
Was Bob better off, worse off, or unaffected by the 
changes in prices? What about Rita?
b. Now suppose that in 
--- PAGE 680 ---

