--- PAGE 162 ---
Consumers, Producers, and 
hen consumers go to grocery stores to buy food for Thanksgiving dinner, 
they may be disappointed see the high price of turkey. At the same time, 
when farmers bring to market the turkeys they have raised, they probably 
wish that the price of turkey were even higher. These views are not surprising: 
Buyers always want to pay less, and sellers always want to be paid more. But is 
there a “right price” for turkey from the standpoint of society as a whole?
In previous chapters, we saw how, in market economies, the forces of supply 
and demand determine the prices of goods and services and the quantities sold. 
--- PAGE 163 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
So far, however, we have described the way markets allocate scarce resources 
without directly addressing the question of whether these market allocations are 
desirable. In other words, our analysis has been positive (what is) rather than nor-
mative (what should be). We know that the price of turkey adjusts to ensure that 
the quantity of turkey supplied equals the quantity of turkey demanded. But at 
this equilibrium, is the quantity of turkey produced and consumed too small, too 
In this chapter, we take up the topic of welfare economics, the study of how 
the allocation of resources affects economic well-being. We begin by examining 
We then examine how society can make these benefits as large as possible. This 
analysis leads to a profound conclusion: In any market, the equilibrium of sup-
ply and demand maximizes the total benefits received by all buyers and sellers 
As you may recall from Chapter 1, one of the Ten Principles of Economics is that 
markets are usually a good way to organize economic activity. The study of wel-
fare economics explains this principle more fully. It also answers our question 
about the right price of turkey: The price that balances the supply and demand for 
turkey is, in a particular sense, the best one because it maximizes the total welfare 
of turkey consumers and turkey producers. No consumer or producer of turkeys 
aims to achieve this goal, but their joint action directed by market prices moves 
them toward a welfare-maximizing outcome, as if led by an invisible hand.
We begin our study of welfare eco
--- PAGE 164 ---
CHAPTER 7   CONSUMERS, PRODUCERS, AND THE EFFICIENCY OF MARKETS
equal to her willingness to pay, the buyer would be indifferent about buying the 
good: If the price is exactly the same as the value she places on the album, she 
would be equally happy buying it or keeping her money.
To sell your album, you begin the bidding process at a low price, say, $10. 
Because all four buyers are willing to pay much more, the price rises quickly. 
The bidding stops when Taylor bids $80 (or slightly more). At this point, Carrie, 
Rihanna, and Gaga have all dropped out of the bidding because they are unwill-
ing to bid any more than $80. Taylor pays you $80 and gets the album. Note that 
the album has gone to the buyer who values it most highly.
What benefit does Taylor receive from buying the Elvis Presley album? In a 
sense, Taylor has found a real bargain: She is willing to pay $100 for the album 
but pays only $80. We say that Taylor receives consumer surplus of $20. Consumer 
surplus is the amount a buyer is willing to pay for a good minus the amount the 
buyer actually pays for it.
Consumer surplus measures the benefit buyers receive from participating in 
a market. In this example, Taylor receives a $20 benefit from participating in the 
auction because she pays only $80 for a good she values at $100. Carrie, Rihanna, 
and Gaga get no consumer surplus from participating in the auction because they 
left without the album and without paying anything.
Now consider a somewhat different example. Suppose that you had two iden-
tical Elvis Presley albums to sell. Again, you auction them
--- PAGE 165 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
(the marginal buyer) is willing to pay for an album. At a quantity of 3 albums, 
the demand curve has a height of $70, the price that Rihanna (who is now the 
marginal buyer) is willing to pay.
Because the demand curve reflects buyers’ willingness to pay, we can also 
use it to measure consumer surplus. Figure 2 uses the demand curve to compute 
consumer surplus in our two examples. In panel (a), the price is $80 (or slightly 
above) and the quantity demanded is 1. Note that the area above the price and 
below the demand curve equals $20. This amount is exactly the consumer surplus 
we computed earlier when only 1 album is sold.
Panel (b) of Figure 2 shows consumer surplus when the price is $70 (or slightly 
above). In this case, the area above the price and below the demand curve equals 
the total area of the two rectangles: Taylor’s consumer surplus at this price is $30 
and Carrie’s is $10. This area equals a total of $40. Once again, this amount is the 
consumer surplus we computed earlier.
The lesson from this example holds for all demand curves: The area below the 
demand curve and above the price measures the consumer surplus in a market. This is 
true because the height of the demand curve represents the value buyers place on 
the good, as measured by their willingness to pay for it. The difference between 
this willingness to pay and the market price is each buyer’s consumer surplus. 
Thus, the total area below the demand curve and above the price is the sum of the 
consumer surplus of all buyers in the market for a good or service.
7
--- PAGE 166 ---
CHAPTER 7   CONSUMERS, PRODUCERS, AND THE EFFICIENCY OF MARKETS
Figure 3 shows a typical demand curve. You may notice that this curve grad-
ually slopes downward instead of taking discrete steps as in the previous two 
 figures. In a market with many buyers, the resulting steps from each buyer drop-
ping out are so small that they form a smooth curve. Although this curve has a 
different shape, the ideas we have just developed still apply: Consumer surplus 
is the area above the price and below the demand curve. In panel (a), consumer 
surplus at a price of P1 is the area of triangle ABC.
Now suppose that the price falls from P1 to P2, as shown in panel (b). The con-
sumer surplus now equals area ADF. The increase in consumer surplus attribut-
able to the lower price is the area BCFD.
This increase in consumer surplus is composed of two parts. First, those buy-
ers who were already buying Q1 of the good at the higher price P1 are better off 
because now they pay less. The increase in consumer surplus of existing buy-
ers is the reduction in the amount they pay; it equals the area of the rectangle 
BCED. Second, some new buyers enter the market because they are willing to 
buy the good at the lower price. As a result, the quantity demanded in the market 
increases from Q1 to Q2. The consumer surplus these newcomers receive is the 
7-1d What Does Consumer Surplus Measure?
Our goal in developing the concept of consumer surplus is to make judgments 
about the desirability of market outcomes. Now that you have seen what con-
sumer surplus is, let’s consider whether it is a good 
--- PAGE 167 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
surplus, the amount that buyers are willing to pay for a good minus the 
amount they actually pay for it, measures the benefit that buyers receive from 
a good as the buyers themselves perceive it. Thus, consumer surplus is a good 
measure of economic well- being if policymakers want to satisfy the prefer-
In some circumstances, policymakers might choose to disregard consumer sur-
plus because they do not respect the preferences that drive buyer behavior. For 
example, drug addicts are willing to pay a high price for heroin. Yet we would not 
say that addicts get a large benefit from being able to buy heroin at a low price 
(even though addicts might say they do). From the standpoint of society, will-
ingness to pay in this instance is not a good measure of the buyers’ benefit, and 
consumer surplus is not a good measure of economic well-being, because addicts 
are not looking after their own best interests.
In most markets, however, consumer surplus does reflect economic well-
being. Economists normally assume that buyers are rational when they make 
decisions. Rational people do the best they can to achieve their objectives, given their 
opportunities. Economists also normally assume that people’s preferences should 
be respected. In this case, consumers are the best judges of how much benefit they 
receive from the goods they buy.
Draw a demand curve for turkey. In your diagram, show a price of turkey 
and the consumer surplus at that price. Explain in words what this con-
(a) Consumer Surplus at Price   1
(b) Consumer Surplus at Price   2

--- PAGE 168 ---
CHAPTER 7   CONSUMERS, PRODUCERS, AND THE EFFICIENCY OF MARKETS
We now turn to the other side of the market and consider the benefits sellers 
receive from participating in a market. As you will see, our analysis of sellers’ 
welfare is similar to our analysis of buyers’ welfare.
7-2a Cost and the Willingness to Sell
Imagine now that you are a homeowner and want to get your house painted. You 
turn to four sellers of painting services: Vincent, Claude, Pablo, and Andy. Each 
painter is willing to do the work for you if the price is right. You decide to take 
bids from the four painters and auction off the job to the painter who will do the 
work for the lowest price.
Each painter is willing to take the job if the price he would receive exceeds his 
cost of doing the work. Here the term cost should be interpreted as the paint-
ers’ opportunity cost: It includes the painters’ out-of-pocket expenses (for paint, 
brushes, and so on) as well as the value that the painters place on their own time. 
Table 2 shows each painter’s cost. Because a painter’s cost is the lowest price he 
would accept for his work, cost is a measure of his willingness to sell his services. 
Each painter would be eager to sell his services at a price greater than his cost 
and would refuse to sell his services at a price less than his cost. At a price exactly 
equal to his cost, he would be indifferent about selling his services: He would be 
equally happy getting the job or using his time and energy for another purpose.
When you take bids from the painters, the price might start high, but it quickly 
fal
--- PAGE 169 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
$800, Andy receives producer surplus of $300 and Pablo receives producer sur-
plus of $200. The total producer surplus in the market is $500.
7-2b Using the Supply Curve to Measure Producer Surplus
Just as consumer surplus is closely related to the demand curve, producer surplus 
is closely related to the supply curve. To see how, let’s continue with our example. 
We begin by using the costs of the four painters to find the supply sched-
ule for painting services. The table in Figure 4 shows the supply schedule that 
corresponds to the costs in Table 2. If the price is below $500, none of the four 
painters is willing to do the job, so the quantity supplied is zero. If the price is 
between $500 and $600, only Andy is willing to do the job, so the quantity sup-
plied is 1. If the price is between $600 and $800, Andy and Pablo are willing to 
do the job, so the quantity supplied is 2, and so on. Thus, the supply schedule is 
derived from the costs of the four painters.
The graph in Figure 4 shows the supply curve that corresponds to this supply 
schedule. Note that the height of the supply curve is related to the sellers’ costs. 
At any quantity, the price given by the supply curve shows the cost of the marginal 
seller, the seller who would leave the market first if the price were any lower. At 
a quantity of 4 houses, for instance, the supply curve has a height of $900, the 
cost that Vincent (the marginal seller) incurs to provide his painting services. At 
a quantity of 3 houses, the supply curve has a height of $800, the cost that Claude 

--- PAGE 170 ---
CHAPTER 7   CONSUMERS, PRODUCERS, AND THE EFFICIENCY OF MARKETS
the supply curve equals $100. This amount is exactly the producer surplus we 
computed earlier for Andy.
Panel (b) of Figure 5 shows producer surplus at a price of $800 (or slightly less). 
In this case, the area below the price and above the supply curve equals the total 
area of the two rectangles. This area equals $500, the producer surplus we com-
puted earlier for Pablo and Andy when two houses needed painting.
The lesson from this example applies to all supply curves: The area below the 
price and above the supply curve measures the producer surplus in a market. The logic 
is straightforward: The height of the supply curve measures sellers’ costs, and the 
difference between the price and the cost of production is each seller’s producer 
surplus. Thus, the total area is the sum of the producer surplus of all sellers.
7-2c How a Higher Price Raises Producer Surplus 
You will not be surprised to hear that sellers always want to receive a higher 
price for the goods they sell. But how much does sellers’ well-being rise in 
response to a higher price? The concept of producer surplus offers a precise 
Figure 6 shows a typical upward-sloping supply curve that would arise in a 
market with many sellers. Although this supply curve differs in shape from the 
previous figure, we measure producer surplus in the same way: Producer surplus 
is the area below the price and above the supply curve. In panel (a), the price is P1
and producer surplus is the area of triangle ABC.
Measuring Producer Surplus  
In panel (a), t
--- PAGE 171 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
Panel (b) shows what happens when the price rises from P1 to P2. Producer sur-
plus now equals area ADF. This increase in producer surplus has two parts. First, 
those sellers who were already selling Q1 of the good at the lower price P1 are 
better off because they now get more for what they sell. The increase in producer 
surplus for existing sellers equals the area of the rectangle BCED. Second, some 
new sellers enter the market because they are willing to produce the good at the 
higher price, resulting in an increase in the quantity supplied from Q1 to Q2. The 
producer surplus of these newcomers is the area of the triangle CEF.
As this analysis shows, we use producer surplus to measure the well-being of 
sellers in much the same way as we use consumer surplus to measure the well- 
being of buyers. Because these two measures of economic welfare are so similar, it is 
natural to use them together. Indeed, that is exactly what we do in the next section.
Draw a supply curve for turkey. In your diagram, show a price of turkey 
and the producer surplus at that price. Explain in words what this pro-
How Price Affects Producer 
(b) Producer Surplus at Price   2 
(a)  Producer Surplus at Price   1 
In panel (a), the price is P1, the quantity supplied is Q1, and producer surplus equals  
the area of the triangle ABC. When the price rises from P1 to P2, as in panel (b), the 
quantity supplied rises from Q1 to Q2 and the producer surplus rises to the area of the  
triangle ADF. The increase in producer surplus (area BCFD) occurs in part because  
e
--- PAGE 172 ---
CHAPTER 7   CONSUMERS, PRODUCERS, AND THE EFFICIENCY OF MARKETS
7-3a The Benevolent Social Planner
To evaluate market outcomes, we introduce into our analysis a new, hypothetical 
character called the benevolent social planner. The benevolent social planner is an 
all-knowing, all-powerful, well-intentioned dictator. The planner wants to max-
imize the economic well-being of everyone in society. What should this planner 
do? Should she just leave buyers and sellers at the equilibrium that they reach 
naturally on their own? Or can she increase economic well-being by altering the 
market outcome in some way?
To answer this question, the planner must first decide how to measure the eco-
nomic well-being of a society. One possible measure is the sum of consumer and 
producer surplus, which we call total surplus. Consumer surplus is the benefit that 
buyers receive from participating in a market, and producer surplus is the benefit 
that sellers receive. It is therefore natural to use total surplus as a measure of soci-
ety’s economic well-being.
To better understand this measure of economic well-being, recall how we mea-
sure consumer and producer surplus. We define consumer surplus as
Consumer surplus 5 Value to buyers 2 Amount paid by buyers.
Similarly, we define producer surplus as
Producer surplus 5 Amount received by sellers 2 Cost to sellers.
When we add consumer and producer surplus together, we obtain
Total surplus 5 (Value to buyers 2 Amount paid by buyers) 
1 (Amount received by sellers 2 Cost to sellers).
The amount paid by buyers equals the amount received by selle
--- PAGE 173 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
the pie is sliced and how the portions are distributed among members of society. 
In this chapter, we concentrate on efficiency as the social planner’s goal. Keep in 
mind, however, that real policymakers often care about equality as well.
7-3b Evaluating the Market Equilibrium 
Figure 7 shows consumer and producer surplus when a market reaches the equi-
librium of supply and demand. Recall that consumer surplus equals the area 
above the price and under the demand curve and producer surplus equals the 
area below the price and above the supply curve. Thus, the total area between 
the supply and demand curves up to the point of equilibrium represents the total 
Is this equilibrium allocation of resources efficient? That is, does it maximize 
total surplus? To answer this question, recall that when a market is in equilibrium, 
the price determines which buyers and sellers participate in the market. Those 
buyers who value the good more than the price (represented by the segment 
AE on the demand curve) choose to buy the good; buyers who value it less than 
the price (represented by the segment EB) do not. Similarly, those sellers whose 
costs are less than the price (represented by the segment CE on the supply curve) 
choose to produce and sell the good; sellers whose costs are greater than the price 
(represented by the segment ED) do not.
These observations lead to two insights about market outcomes:
1. Free markets allocate the supply of goods to the buyers who value them most 
highly, as measured by their willingness to pay.
2. Free markets
--- PAGE 174 ---
CHAPTER 7   CONSUMERS, PRODUCERS, AND THE EFFICIENCY OF MARKETS
Thus, given the quantity produced and sold in a market equilibrium, the social 
planner cannot increase economic well-being by changing the allocation of con-
sumption among buyers or the allocation of production among sellers.
But can the social planner raise total economic well-being by increasing or 
decreasing the quantity of the good? The answer is no, as stated in this third 
insight about market outcomes: 
3. Free markets produce the quantity of goods that maximizes the sum of 
consumer and producer surplus.
Figure 8 illustrates why this is true. To interpret this figure, keep in mind that the 
demand curve reflects the value to buyers and the supply curve reflects the cost 
to sellers. At any quantity below the equilibrium level, such as Q1, the value to the 
marginal buyer exceeds the cost to the marginal seller. As a result, increasing the 
quantity produced and consumed raises total surplus. This continues to be true 
until the quantity reaches the equilibrium level. Similarly, at any quantity beyond 
the equilibrium level, such as Q2, the value to the marginal buyer is less than the 
cost to the marginal seller. In this case, decreasing the quantity raises total sur-
plus, and this continues to be true until quantity falls to the equilibrium level. To 
maximize total surplus, the social planner would choose the quantity where the 
supply and demand curves intersect.
Together, these three insights tell us that the market outcome makes the sum of 
consumer and producer surplus as large as it can be. I
--- PAGE 175 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
Society is lucky that the planner doesn’t need to intervene. Although it has been 
a useful exercise imagining what an all-knowing, all-powerful, well- intentioned 
dictator would do, let’s face it: Such characters are hard to come by. Dictators are 
rarely benevolent, and even if we found someone so virtuous, she would lack 
 Suppose our social planner tried to choose an efficient allocation of resources 
on her own, instead of relying on market forces. To do so, she would need to know 
the value of a particular good to every potential consumer in the market and the 
cost for every potential producer. And she would need this information not only 
for this market but for every one of the many thousands of markets in the econ-
economies never work very well.
The planner’s job becomes easy, however, once she takes on a partner: Adam 
Smith’s invisible hand of the marketplace. The invisible hand takes all the infor-
mation about buyers and sellers into account and guides everyone in the market 
to the best outcome as judged by the standard of economic efficiency. It is a truly 
remarkable feat. That is why economists so often advocate free markets as the 
best way to organize economic activity.
In many cities, finding an available 
parking spot on the street seems about 
as likely as winning the lottery. But 
if local governments relied more on 
the price system, they might be able to 
achieve a more efficient allocation of 
AN FRANCISCO—The maddening quest 
for street parking is not just a tribulation 
for drivers, but a trial for cities. As muc
--- PAGE 176 ---
CHAPTER 7   CONSUMERS, PRODUCERS, AND THE EFFICIENCY OF MARKETS
SHOULD THERE BE A MARKET FOR ORGANS?
Some years ago, the front page of The Boston Globe ran the head-
line “How a Mother’s Love Helped Save Two Lives.” The newspa-
per told the story of Susan Stephens, a woman whose son needed 
a kidney transplant. When the doctor learned that the mother’s kidney was 
not compatible, he proposed a novel solution: If Stephens donated one of her 
kidneys to a stranger, her son would move to the top of the kidney waiting list. 
The mother accepted the deal, and soon two patients had the transplants they 
The ingenuity of the doctor’s proposal and the nobility of the mother’s act can-
not be doubted. But the story raises some intriguing questions. If the mother could 
trade a kidney for a kidney, would the hospital allow her to trade a kidney for an 
expensive, experimental cancer treatment that she could not otherwise afford? 
Should she be allowed to exchange her kidney for free tuition for her son at the 
hospital’s medical school? Should she be able to sell her kidney and use the cash to 
trade in her old Chevy for a new Lexus?
As a matter of public policy, our society makes it illegal for people to sell their 
organs. In essence, in the market for organs, the government has imposed a price 
Source: New York Times, March 15, 2012.
summer, the city began tweaking its prices 
every two months—giving it the option of 
raising them 25 cents an hour, or lowering 
them by as much as 50 cents—in the hope of 
leaving each block with at least one available 
spot. The city also has cut p
--- PAGE 177 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
ceiling of zero. The result, as with any binding price ceiling, is a 
shortage of the good. The deal in the Stephens case did not fall 
under this prohibition because no cash changed hands.
Many economists believe that there would be large 
 benefits to allowing a free market for organs. People are born 
with two kidneys, but they usually need only one. Mean-
while, some people suffer from illnesses that leave them 
without any working kidney. Despite the obvious gains from 
trade, the current situation is dire: The typical patient has to 
wait several years for a kidney transplant, and every year 
thousands of people die because a compatible kidney can-
not be found. If those needing a kidney were allowed to buy 
one from those who have two, the price would rise to bal-
ance supply and demand. Sellers would be better off with 
the  extra cash in their pockets. Buyers would be better off 
with the organ they need to save their lives. The shortage of 
Such a market would lead to an efficient allocation 
of resources, but critics of this plan worry about fairness. 
A market for organs, they argue, would benefit the rich 
at the expense of the poor because organs would then be 
allocated to those most willing and able to pay. But you can also 
question the fairness of the current system. Now, most of us walk 
around with an extra organ that we don’t really need, while some 
of our fellow citizens are dying to get one. Is that fair? ●
Draw the supply and demand curves for turkey. In the equilibrium, show 
producer and consumer surplus. Explain why
--- PAGE 178 ---
CHAPTER 7   CONSUMERS, PRODUCERS, AND THE EFFICIENCY OF MARKETS
buyers and sellers affect people who are not participants in the market at all. Pol-
lution is the classic example. The use of agricultural pesticides, for instance, affects 
not only the manufacturers who make them and the farmers who use them but 
also many others who breathe the air or drink the water contaminated by these 
pesticides. When a market exhibits such side effects, called externalities, the welfare 
implications of market activity depend on more than just the value obtained by the 
buyers and the cost incurred by the sellers. Because buyers and sellers may ignore 
these side effects when deciding how much to consume and produce, the equilib-
rium in a market can be inefficient from the standpoint of society as a whole. 
Market power and externalities are examples of a general phenomenon called 
market failure—the inability of some unregulated markets to allocate resources 
efficiently. When markets fail, public policy can potentially remedy the problem 
and increase economic efficiency. Microeconomists devote much effort to study-
ing when market failures are likely and how they are best corrected. As you con-
tinue your study of economics, you will see that the tools of welfare economics 
developed here are readily adapted to that endeavor.
Despite the possibility of market failure, the invisible hand of the marketplace 
is extraordinarily important. In many markets, the assumptions we made in this 
chapter work well and the conclusion of market efficiency applies directly. More-
over, we can us
--- PAGE 179 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
r Consumer surplus equals buyers’ willingness to pay 
for a good minus the amount they actually pay, and 
it measures the benefit buyers get from participating 
in a market. Consumer surplus can be computed by 
finding the area below the demand curve and above 
r Producer surplus equals the amount sellers receive 
for their goods minus their costs of production, and 
it measures the benefit sellers get from participat-
ing in a market. Producer surplus can be computed 
by finding the area below the price and above the 
r An allocation of resources that maximizes total sur-
plus (the sum of consumer and producer surplus) is 
said to be efficient. Policymakers are often concerned 
with the efficiency, as well as the equality, of economic 
r The equilibrium of supply and demand maximizes 
total surplus. That is, the invisible hand of the mar-
ketplace leads buyers and sellers to allocate resources 
r Markets do not allocate resources efficiently in the 
presence of market failures such as market power or 
willingness to pay, p. 134
1. Explain how buyers’ willingness to pay, consumer 
surplus, and the demand curve are related.
2. Explain how sellers’ costs, producer surplus, and the 
3. In a supply-and-demand diagram, show producer and 
consumer surplus at the market equilibrium.
4. What is efficiency? Is it the only goal of economic 
5. Name two types of market failure. Explain why each 
may cause market outcomes to be inefficient.
1. Melissa buys an iPhone for $240 and gets consumer 
a. What is her willingness to pay?
b. If she had bought t
--- PAGE 180 ---
CHAPTER 7   CONSUMERS, PRODUCERS, AND THE EFFICIENCY OF MARKETS
a. From this information, derive Bert’s demand 
schedule. Graph his demand curve for bottled 
b. If the price of a bottle of water is $4, how many 
bottles does Bert buy? How much consumer 
surplus does Bert get from his purchases? Show 
Bert’s consumer surplus in your graph.
c. If the price falls to $2, how does quantity 
 demanded change? How does Bert’s consumer 
surplus change? Show these changes in  
5. Ernie owns a water pump. Because pumping large 
amounts of water is harder than pumping small 
amounts, the cost of producing a bottle of water 
rises as he pumps more. Here is the cost he incurs to 
 produce each bottle of water:
a. From this information, derive Ernie’s supply 
schedule. Graph his supply curve for bottled 
b. If the price of a bottle of water is $4, how many 
bottles does Ernie produce and sell? How much 
producer surplus does Ernie get from these sales? 
Show Ernie’s producer surplus in your graph.
c. If the price rises to $6, how does quantity sup-
plied change? How does Ernie’s producer surplus 
change? Show these changes in your graph.
6. Consider a market in which Bert from problem 4 is the 
buyer and Ernie from problem 5 is the seller. 
a. Use Ernie’s supply schedule and Bert’s demand 
schedule to find the quantity supplied and quan-
tity demanded at prices of $2, $4, and $6. Which 
of these prices brings supply and demand into 
b. What are consumer surplus, producer surplus, 
and total surplus in this equilibrium?
c. If Ernie produced and Bert consumed one fewer 
bottle of water, wh
--- PAGE 181 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
monthly demand for minutes of calling is given  
by the equation QD 5 150 2 50P, where P is the  
a. With each provider, what is the cost to your friend 
of an extra minute on the phone?
b. In light of your answer to (a), how many minutes 
with each provider would your friend talk on the 
c. How much would she end up paying each pro-
d. How much consumer surplus would she obtain 
with each provider? (Hint: Graph the demand 
curve and recall the formula for the area of a 
e. Which provider would you recommend that your 
11. Consider how health insurance affects the quantity 
of healthcare services performed. Suppose that the 
typical medical procedure has a cost of $100, yet a 
person with health insurance pays only $20 out of 
pocket. Her insurance company pays the remaining 
$80. (The insurance company recoups the $80 through 
premiums, but the premium a person pays does not 
depend on how many procedures that person chooses 
a. Draw the demand curve in the market for medical 
care. (In your diagram, the horizontal axis should 
represent the number of medical procedures.) 
Show the quantity of procedures demanded if 
each procedure has a price of $100. 
b. On your diagram, show the quantity of proce-
dures demanded if consumers pay only $20 per 
procedure. If the cost of each procedure to society 
is truly $100, and if individuals have health in-
surance as described above, will the number of 
procedures performed maximize total surplus? 
c. Economists often blame the health insurance sys-
tem for excessive use of medical care. Given your 
an
--- PAGE 182 ---
axes are often a source of heated political debate. In 1776, the anger of the 
American colonists over British taxes sparked the American Revolution. More 
than two centuries later, the American political parties still debate the proper 
size and shape of the tax system. Yet no one would deny that some level of tax-
ation is necessary. As Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., once said, “Taxes are what we 
pay for civilized society.”
Because taxation has such a major impact on the modern economy, we return to 
the topic several times throughout this book as we expand the set of tools we have 
--- PAGE 183 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
at our disposal. We began our study of taxes in Chapter 6. There we saw how a 
tax on a good affects its price and quantity sold and how the forces of supply and 
demand divide the burden of a tax between buyers and sellers. In this chapter, we 
extend this analysis and look at how taxes affect welfare, the economic well-being 
of participants in a market. In other words, we see how high the price of civilized 
The effects of taxes on welfare might at first seem obvious. The government 
enacts taxes to raise revenue, and this revenue must come out of someone’s 
pocket. As we saw in Chapter 6, both buyers and sellers are worse off when a 
good is taxed: A tax raises the price buyers pay and lowers the price sellers 
receive. Yet to fully understand how taxes affect economic well-being, we must 
compare the reduced welfare of buyers and sellers to the amount of revenue the 
government raises. The tools of consumer and producer surplus allow us to make 
this comparison. Our analysis will show that the cost of taxes to buyers and sell-
ers typically exceeds the revenue raised by the government.
8-1 The Deadweight Loss of Taxation
We begin by recalling one of the surprising lessons from Chapter 6: The impact of 
a tax on a market outcome is the same whether the tax is levied on buyers or sell-
ers of a good. When a tax is levied on buyers, the demand curve shifts downward 
by the size of the tax; when it is levied on sellers, the supply curve shifts upward 
by that amount. In either case, when the tax is enacted, the price paid by buyers 
rises, an
--- PAGE 184 ---
CHAPTER 8   APPLICATION: THE COSTS OF TAXATION 
curve shifts) or buyers (the demand curve shifts). In this chapter, we keep the 
analysis general and simplify the graphs by not showing the shift. For our pur-
poses here, the key result is that the tax places a wedge between the price buyers 
pay and the price sellers receive. Because of this tax wedge, the quantity sold falls 
below the level that would be sold without a tax. In other words, a tax on a good 
causes the size of the market for the good to shrink. These results should be famil-
8-1a How a Tax Affects Market Participants
Let’s use the tools of welfare economics to measure the gains and losses from a 
tax on a good. To do this, we must take into account how the tax affects buyers, 
sellers, and the government. The benefit received by buyers in a market is mea-
sured by consumer surplus—the amount buyers are willing to pay for the good 
minus the amount they actually pay for it. The benefit received by sellers in a 
market is measured by producer surplus—the amount sellers receive for the good 
minus their costs. These are precisely the measures of economic welfare we used 
What about the third interested party, the government? If T is the size of the tax 
and Q is the quantity of the good sold, then the government gets total tax revenue 
of T 3 Q. It can use this tax revenue to provide services, such as roads, police, 
and public education, or to help the needy. Therefore, to analyze how taxes affect 
economic well-being, we use the government’s tax revenue to measure the public 
benefit from the tax. Keep in mi
--- PAGE 185 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
Welfare without a Tax   To see how a tax affects welfare, we begin by consider-
ing welfare before the government imposes a tax. Figure 3 shows the supply-and- 
demand diagram with the key areas marked by the letters A through F. 
Without a tax, the equilibrium price and quantity are found at the intersection 
of the supply and demand curves. The price is P1, and the quantity sold is Q1. 
 Because the demand curve reflects buyers’ willingness to pay, consumer surplus 
is the area between the demand curve and the price, A 1 B 1 C. Similarly, because 
the supply curve reflects sellers’ costs, producer surplus is the area between the 
supply curve and the price, D 1 E 1 F. In this case, because there is no tax, tax 
Total surplus, the sum of consumer and producer surplus, equals the area 
A 1 B 1 C 1 D 1 E 1 F. In other words, as we saw in Chapter 7, total surplus is 
the area between the supply and demand curves up to the equilibrium quantity. 
The first column of the table in Figure 3 summarizes these conclusions.
Welfare with a Tax   Now consider welfare after the tax is enacted. The price paid 
by buyers rises from P1 to PB, so consumer surplus now equals only area A (the 
A tax on a good reduces consumer surplus (by the area B 1 C) and producer surplus (by 
the area D 1 E). Because the fall in producer and consumer surplus exceeds tax revenue 
(area B 1 D), the tax is said to impose a deadweight loss (area C 1 E).
The area C 1 E shows the fall in total surplus and is the deadweight loss of the tax.
--- PAGE 186 ---
CHAPTER 8   APPLICATION: THE COSTS OF TAXATION 
area below the demand curve and above the buyers’ price). The price received by 
sellers falls from P1 to PS, so producer surplus now equals only area F (the area 
above the supply curve and below the sellers’ price). The quantity sold falls from 
Q1 to Q2, and the government collects tax revenue equal to the area B 1 D.
To compute total surplus with the tax, we add consumer surplus, producer sur-
plus, and tax revenue. Thus, we find that total surplus is area A 1 B 1 D 1 F. The 
second column of the table summarizes these results.
Changes in Welfare  We can now see the effects of the tax by comparing welfare 
before and after the tax is enacted. The third column of the table in Figure 3 shows 
the changes. Consumer surplus falls by the area B 1 C, and producer surplus falls 
by the area D 1 E. Tax revenue rises by the area B 1 D. Not surprisingly, the tax 
makes buyers and sellers worse off and the government better off. 
The change in total welfare includes the change in consumer surplus (which is 
negative), the change in producer surplus (which is also negative), and the change 
in tax revenue (which is positive). When we add these three pieces together, we 
find that total surplus in the market falls by the area C 1 E. Thus, the losses to buy-
ers and sellers from a tax exceed the revenue raised by the government. The fall in total 
surplus that results when a tax (or some other policy) distorts a market outcome is 
called a deadweight loss. The area C 1 E measures the size of the deadweight loss. 
To understand why taxes
--- PAGE 187 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
The area of the triangle between the supply and demand curves created by the 
tax wedge (area C 1 E in Figure 3) measures these losses. This conclusion can be 
seen more easily in Figure 4 by recalling that the demand curve reflects the value 
of the good to consumers and that the supply curve reflects the costs of producers. 
When the tax raises the price buyers pay to PB and lowers the price sellers receive 
to PS, the marginal buyers and sellers leave the market, so the quantity sold falls 
from Q1 to Q2. Yet as the figure shows, the value of the good to these buyers still 
exceeds the cost to these sellers. At every quantity between Q1 and Q2, the situation 
is the same as in our example with Mike and Mei. The gains from trade—the dif-
ference between buyers’ value and sellers’ cost—are less than the tax. As a result, 
these trades are not made once the tax is imposed. The deadweight loss is the sur-
plus that is lost because the tax discourages these mutually advantageous trades.
Draw the supply and demand curves for cookies. If the government im-
poses a tax on cookies, show what happens to the price paid by buyers, 
the price received by sellers, and the quantity of cookies sold. In your diagram, show the 
deadweight loss from the tax. Explain the meaning of the deadweight loss.
When the government  imposes 
a tax on a good, the  quantity 
sold falls from Q1 to Q2. 
At  every quantity between 
Q1 and Q2, the potential gains 
from trade among buyers and 
sellers are not realized. These 
lost gains from trade create the 
Reduction in quan
--- PAGE 188 ---
CHAPTER 8   APPLICATION: THE COSTS OF TAXATION 
Tax Distortions and Elasticities
In panels (a) and (b), the demand curve and the size of the tax are the same, but the price 
elasticity of supply is different. Notice that the more elastic the supply curve, the larger the 
deadweight loss of the tax. In panels (c) and (d), the supply curve and the size of the tax 
are the same, but the price elasticity of demand is different. Notice that the more elastic the 
demand curve, the larger the deadweight loss of the tax.
price. Notice that the deadweight loss, the area of the triangle between the supply 
and demand curves, is larger when the supply curve is more elastic.
Similarly, the bottom two panels of Figure 5 show how the elasticity of demand 
affects the size of the deadweight loss. Here the supply curve and the size of the 
tax are held constant. In panel (c), the demand curve is relatively inelastic, and 
the deadweight loss is small. In panel (d), the demand curve is more elastic, and 
the deadweight loss from the tax is larger. 
The lesson from this figure is apparent. A tax has a deadweight loss because 
it induces buyers and sellers to change their behavior. The tax raises the price 
--- PAGE 189 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
paid by buyers, so they consume less. At the same time, the tax lowers the price 
received by sellers, so they produce less. Because of these changes in behavior, the 
equilibrium quantity in the market shrinks below the optimal quantity. The more 
responsive buyers and sellers are to changes in the price, the more the equilibrium 
quantity shrinks. Hence, the greater the elasticities of supply and demand, the greater 
the deadweight loss of a tax.
THE DEADWEIGHT LOSS DEBATE
Supply, demand, elasticity, deadweight loss—all this economic the-
ory is enough to make your head spin. But believe it or not, these 
ideas are at the heart of a profound political question: How big 
should the government be? The debate hinges on these concepts because the larger 
the deadweight loss of taxation, the larger the cost of any government program. If 
taxation entails large deadweight losses, then these losses are a strong  argument 
for a leaner government that does less and taxes less. But if taxes  impose small 
deadweight losses, then government programs are less costly than they otherwise 
might be, which in turn argues for a more expansive government.
So how big are the deadweight losses of taxation? Economists disagree on the 
answer to this question. To see the nature of this disagreement, consider the most 
important tax in the U.S. economy: the tax on labor. The Social Security tax, the 
Medicare tax, and much of the federal income tax are labor taxes. Many state gov-
ernments also tax labor earnings through state income taxes. A labor tax places a 

--- PAGE 190 ---
CHAPTER 8   APPLICATION: THE COSTS OF TAXATION 
trade, or working at jobs that pay “under the table” to evade taxes. Economists 
call this the underground economy. In deciding whether to work in the under-
ground economy or at a legitimate job, these potential criminals compare what 
they can earn by breaking the law with the wage they can earn legally.
In each of these cases, the quantity of labor supplied responds to the wage (the 
price of labor). Thus, these workers’ decisions are distorted when their labor earn-
ings are taxed. Labor taxes encourage workers to work fewer hours, second earn-
ers to stay at home, the elderly to retire early, and the unscrupulous to enter the 
The debate over the distortionary effects of labor taxation persists to this day. 
Indeed, whenever you see two political candidates debating whether the govern-
ment should provide more services or reduce the tax burden, keep in mind that 
part of the disagreement may rest on different views about the elasticity of labor 
supply and the deadweight loss of taxation. ●
The demand for beer is more elastic than the demand for milk. Would a 
tax on beer or a tax on milk have a larger deadweight loss? Why? 
on the elasticity of labor 
EPA EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY B.V. / ALAMY
8-3 Deadweight Loss and Tax Revenue as Taxes Vary
Taxes rarely stay the same for long periods of time. Policymakers in local, state, 
and federal governments are always considering raising one tax or lowering 
another. Here we consider what happens to the deadweight loss and tax revenue 
when the size of a tax changes.
Figure 6 sh
--- PAGE 191 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
The deadweight loss is the reduction in total surplus due to the tax. Tax revenue is the 
amount of the tax multiplied by the amount of the good sold. In panel (a), a small tax has a 
small deadweight loss and raises a small amount of revenue. In panel (b), a somewhat larger 
tax has a larger deadweight loss and raises a larger amount of revenue. In panel (c), a very 
large tax has a very large deadweight loss, but because it has reduced the size of the market 
so much, the tax raises only a small amount of revenue. Panels (d) and (e) summarize these 
conclusions. Panel (d) shows that as the size of a tax grows larger, the deadweight loss grows 
larger. Panel (e) shows that tax revenue first rises and then falls. This relationship is called 
(d) From panel (a) to panel (c), 
deadweight loss continually increases.
(e) From panel (a) to panel (c), tax 
revenue first increases, then decreases.
THE LAFFER CURVE AND SUPPLY-SIDE ECONOMICS
One day in 1974, economist Arthur Laffer sat in a Washington restau-
rant with some prominent journalists and politicians. He took out a 
napkin and drew a figure on it to show how tax rates affect tax rev-
enue. It looked much like panel (e) of our Figure 6. Laffer then suggested that the 
United States was on the downward-sloping side of this curve. Tax rates were so 
high, he argued, that reducing them might actually increase tax revenue.
Most economists were skeptical of Laffer’s suggestion. They accepted the idea 
that a cut in tax rates could increase tax revenue as a matter of economic theory, 
--- PAGE 192 ---
CHAPTER 8   APPLICATION: THE COSTS OF TAXATION 
“A cut in federal income tax rates in the United States right now 
would lead to higher national income within five years than with-
“A cut in federal income tax rates in the United States right now 
would raise taxable income enough so that the annual total tax rev-
enue would be higher within five years than without the tax cut.”
but they doubted whether it would do so in practice. There was scant evidence for 
Laffer’s view that U.S. tax rates had in fact reached such extreme levels. 
Nonetheless, the Laffer curve (as it became known) captured the imagination of 
Ronald Reagan. David Stockman, budget director in the first Reagan administra-
tion, offers the following story:
[Reagan] had once been on the Laffer curve himself. “I came into the Big Money 
making pictures during World War II,” he would always say. At that time the 
wartime income surtax hit 90 percent. “You could only make four pictures and 
then you were in the top bracket,” he would continue. “So we all quit work-
ing after four pictures and went off to the country.” High tax rates caused less 
work. Low tax rates caused more. His experience proved it.
When Reagan ran for president in 1980, he made cutting taxes part of his platform. 
Reagan argued that taxes were so high that they were discouraging hard work and 
thereby depressing incomes. He argued that lower taxes would give people more 
incentive to work, which in turn would raise economic well-being. He suggested 
that incomes could rise by so much that tax revenue might increase, despite the 
lower tax
--- PAGE 193 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
In this chapter, we have used the tools developed in the previous chapter to fur-
ther our understanding of taxes. One of the Ten Principles of Economics discussed in 
Chapter 1 is that markets are usually a good way to organize economic activity. In 
Chapter 7, we used the concepts of producer and consumer surplus to make this 
principle more precise. Here we have seen that when the government imposes 
taxes on buyers or sellers of a good, society loses some of the benefits of market 
efficiency. Taxes are costly to market participants not only because taxes transfer 
resources from those participants to the government but also because they alter 
incentives and distort market outcomes.
The analysis presented here and in Chapter 6 should give you a good basis for 
understanding the economic impact of taxes, but this is not the end of the story. 
Microeconomists study how best to design a tax system, including how to strike 
the right balance between equality and efficiency. Macroeconomists study how 
taxes influence the overall economy and how policymakers can use the tax system 
to stabilize economic activity and to achieve more rapid economic growth. So as 
you continue your study of economics, don’t be surprised when the subject of 
taxation comes up yet again.
1. A tax on a good has a deadweight loss if
a. the reduction in consumer and producer surplus is 
greater than the tax revenue.
b. the tax revenue is greater than the reduction in 
consumer and producer surplus.
c. the reduction in consumer surplus is greater than 
the reduction in 
--- PAGE 194 ---
CHAPTER 8   APPLICATION: THE COSTS OF TAXATION 
r A tax on a good reduces the welfare of buyers and sell-
ers of the good, and the reduction in consumer and 
producer surplus usually exceeds the revenue raised 
by the government. The fall in total surplus—the 
sum of consumer surplus, producer surplus, and tax 
 revenue—is called the deadweight loss of the tax.
r Taxes have deadweight losses because they cause buy-
ers to consume less and sellers to produce less, and 
these changes in behavior shrink the size of the market 
below the level that maximizes total surplus. Because 
the elasticities of supply and demand measure how 
much market participants respond to market condi-
tions, larger elasticities imply larger deadweight losses.
r As a tax grows larger, it distorts incentives more, and its 
deadweight loss grows larger. Because a tax reduces the 
size of the market, however, tax revenue does not con-
tinually increase. It first rises with the size of a tax, but 
if the tax gets large enough, tax revenue starts to fall. 
1. What happens to consumer and producer surplus 
when the sale of a good is taxed? How does the 
change in consumer and producer surplus compare to 
2. Draw a supply-and-demand diagram with a tax on 
the sale of a good. Show the deadweight loss. Show 
3. How do the elasticities of supply and demand affect 
the deadweight loss of a tax? Why do they have this 
4. Why do experts disagree about whether labor taxes 
have small or large deadweight losses? 
5. What happens to the deadweight loss and tax revenue 
1. The market for pizza is characterized by
--- PAGE 195 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
4. Suppose that the government imposes a tax on heat-
a. Would the deadweight loss from this tax likely be 
greater in the first year after it is imposed or in the 
b. Would the revenue collected from this tax likely 
be greater in the first year after it is imposed or in 
5. After economics class one day, your friend suggests 
that taxing food would be a good way to raise revenue 
because the demand for food is quite inelastic. In what 
sense is taxing food a “good” way to raise revenue? In 
what sense is it not a “good” way to raise revenue?
6. Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the late senator from 
New York, once introduced a bill that would levy a 
10,000 percent tax on certain hollow-tipped bullets.
a. Do you expect that this tax would raise much 
b. Even if the tax would raise no revenue, why 
might Senator Moynihan have proposed it?
7. The government places a tax on the purchase of socks.
a. Illustrate the effect of this tax on equilibrium price 
and quantity in the sock market. Identify the fol-
lowing areas both before and after the imposition 
of the tax: total spending by consumers, total reve-
nue for producers, and government tax revenue.
b. Does the price received by producers rise or fall? 
Can you tell whether total receipts for producers 
c. Does the price paid by consumers rise or fall? Can 
you tell whether total spending by consumers 
rises or falls? Explain carefully. (Hint: Think about 
elasticity.) If total consumer spending falls, does 
consumer surplus rise? Explain.
8. This chapter analyzed the welfare effects of a tax on a 

--- PAGE 196 ---
f you check the labels on the clothes you are wearing, you will probably find 
that some were made in another country. A century ago, the textile and clothing 
industry was a major part of the U.S. economy, but that is no longer the case. 
Faced with foreign competitors that can produce quality goods at low cost, many 
U.S. firms found it increasingly difficult to produce and sell textiles and clothing 
at a profit. As a result, they laid off their workers and shut down their factories. 
Today, most of the textiles and clothing that Americans consume are imported.
The story of the textile industry raises important questions for economic pol-
icy: How does international trade affect economic well-being? Who gains 
and who loses from free trade among countries, and how do the 
gains compare to the losses? 
--- PAGE 197 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
Chapter 3 introduced the study of international trade by applying the principle 
of comparative advantage. According to this principle, all countries can benefit 
from trading with one another because trade allows each country to specialize in 
doing what it does best. But the analysis in Chapter 3 was incomplete. It did not 
explain how the international marketplace achieves these gains from trade or how 
the gains are distributed among the various economic participants.
We now return to the study of international trade to tackle these questions. 
Over the past several chapters, we have developed many tools for analyzing 
how markets work: supply, demand, equilibrium, consumer surplus, producer 
surplus, and so on. With these tools, we can learn more about how international 
trade affects economic well-being.
9-1 The Determinants of Trade
Consider the market for textiles. The textile market is well suited to studying the 
gains and losses from international trade: Textiles are made in many countries 
around the world, and there is much world trade in textiles. Moreover, the textile 
market is one in which policymakers often consider (and sometimes implement) 
trade restrictions to protect domestic producers from foreign competitors. Here 
we examine the textile market in the imaginary country of Isoland. 
9-1a The Equilibrium without Trade
As our story begins, the Isolandian textile market is isolated from the rest of the 
world. By government decree, no one in Isoland is allowed to import or export 
textiles, and the penalty for violating th
--- PAGE 198 ---
CHAPTER 9   APPLICATION: INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Now suppose that, in a political upset, Isoland elects a new president. The 
president campaigned on a platform of “change” and promised the voters bold 
new ideas. Her first act is to assemble a team of economists to evaluate Isolandian 
trade policy. She asks them to report on three questions:
r If the government allows Isolandians to import and export textiles, what will 
happen to the price of textiles and the quantity of textiles sold in the domes-
r Who will gain from free trade in textiles and who will lose, and will the gains 
r Should a tariff (a tax on textile imports) be part of the new trade policy?
After reviewing supply and demand in their favorite textbook (this one, of 
course), the Isolandian economics team begins its analysis. 
9-1b The World Price and Comparative Advantage
The first issue our economists take up is whether Isoland is likely to become a 
textile importer or a textile exporter. In other words, if free trade is allowed, will 
Isolandians end up buying or selling textiles in world markets?
To answer this question, the economists compare the current Isolandian 
price of textiles to the price of textiles in other countries. We call the price 
prevailing in world markets the world price. If the world price of textiles is 
higher than the domestic price, then Isoland will export textiles once trade 
is permitted. Isolandian textile producers will be eager to receive the higher 
prices available abroad and will start selling their textiles to buyers in other 
countries. Conversely, if the world price 
--- PAGE 199 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
To analyze the welfare effects of free trade, the Isolandian economists begin with 
the assumption that Isoland is a small economy compared to the rest of the world. 
This small-economy assumption means that Isoland’s actions have little effect on 
world markets. Specifically, any change in Isoland’s trade policy will not affect 
the world price of textiles. The Isolandians are said to be price takers in the world 
economy. That is, they take the world price of textiles as given. Isoland can be an 
exporting country by selling textiles at this price or an importing country by buy-
ing textiles at this price. 
The small-economy assumption is not necessary to analyze the gains and losses 
from international trade. But the Isolandian economists know from experience 
(and from reading Chapter 2 of this book) that making simplifying assumptions is 
a key part of building a useful economic model. The assumption that Isoland is a 
small economy simplifies the analysis, and the basic lessons do not change in the 
more complicated case of a large economy.
9-2a The Gains and Losses of an Exporting Country
Figure 2 shows the Isolandian textile market when the domestic equilibrium price 
before trade is below the world price. Once trade is allowed, the domestic price 
rises to equal the world price. No seller of textiles would accept less than the 
world price, and no buyer would pay more than the world price.
9-2 The Winners and Losers from Trade
International Trade in an 
Once trade is allowed, the 
domestic price rises to equal 
the world price. The su
--- PAGE 200 ---
CHAPTER 9   APPLICATION: INTERNATIONAL TRADE
After the domestic price has risen to equal the world price, the domestic 
 quantity supplied differs from the domestic quantity demanded. The supply 
curve shows the quantity of textiles supplied by Isolandian sellers. The demand 
curve shows the quantity of textiles demanded by Isolandian buyers. Because 
the domestic quantity supplied is greater than the domestic quantity demanded, 
 Isoland sells textiles to other countries. Thus, Isoland becomes a textile exporter.
Although domestic quantity supplied and domestic quantity demanded differ, 
the textile market is still in equilibrium because there is now another participant 
in the market: the rest of the world. One can view the horizontal line at the world 
price as representing the rest of the world’s demand for textiles. This demand 
curve is perfectly elastic because Isoland, as a small economy, can sell as many 
textiles as it wants at the world price.
Consider the gains and losses from opening up trade. Clearly, not everyone 
benefits. Trade forces the domestic price to rise to the world price. Domestic pro-
ducers of textiles are better off because they can now sell textiles at a higher price, 
but domestic consumers of textiles are worse off because they now have to buy 
textiles at a higher price.
To measure these gains and losses, we look at the changes in consumer and 
producer surplus. Before trade is allowed, the price of textiles adjusts to balance 
domestic supply and domestic demand. Consumer surplus, the area between the 
demand curve and the before-trade pric
--- PAGE 201 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
Once again, consider the gains and losses from trade. As in the previous case, 
not everyone benefits, but here the winners and losers are reversed. When trade 
forces the domestic price to fall, domestic consumers are better off (they can now 
buy textiles at a lower price), and domestic producers are worse off (they now 
have to sell textiles at a lower price). Changes in consumer and producer surplus 
measure the size of the gains and losses. Before trade, consumer surplus is area A, 
producer surplus is area B 1 C, and total surplus is area A 1 B 1 C. After trade is 
allowed, consumer surplus is area A 1 B 1 D, producer surplus is area C, and total 
surplus is area A 1 B 1 C 1 D. 
These welfare calculations show who wins and who loses from trade in an 
importing country. Buyers benefit because consumer surplus increases by the area 
B 1 D. Sellers are worse off because producer surplus falls by the area B. The gains 
of buyers exceed the losses of sellers, and total surplus increases by the area D.
This analysis of an importing country yields two conclusions parallel to those 
r When a country allows trade and becomes an importer of a good, domestic 
consumers of the good are better off, and domestic producers of the good are 
r Trade raises the economic well-being of a nation in the sense that the gains of 
the winners exceed the losses of the losers.
International Trade in an 
Once trade is allowed, the do-
mestic price falls to equal the 
world price. The supply curve 
shows the amount produced 
domestically, and the demand 
curve sho
--- PAGE 202 ---
CHAPTER 9   APPLICATION: INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Having completed our analysis of trade, we can better understand one of the 
Ten Principles of Economics in Chapter 1: Trade can make everyone better off. If 
Isoland opens its textile market to international trade, the change creates winners 
and losers, regardless of whether Isoland ends up exporting or importing textiles. 
In either case, however, the gains of the winners exceed the losses of the losers, so 
the winners could compensate the losers and still be better off. In this sense, trade 
can make everyone better off. But will trade make everyone better off? Probably 
not. In practice, compensation for the losers from international trade is rare. With-
out such compensation, opening an economy to international trade is a policy that 
expands the size of the economic pie, but it can leave some participants in the 
economy with a smaller slice.
We can now see why the debate over trade policy is often contentious. When-
ever a policy creates winners and losers, the stage is set for a political battle. 
Nations sometimes fail to enjoy the gains from trade because the losers from free 
trade are better organized than the winners. The losers may turn their cohesiveness 
into political clout and lobby for trade restrictions such as tariffs or import quotas.
The Isolandian economists next consider the effects of a tariff—a tax on imported 
goods. The economists quickly realize that a tariff on textiles will have no effect if 
Isoland becomes a textile exporter. If no one in Isoland is interested in importing 
textiles, a tax on t
--- PAGE 203 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
A tariff, a tax on imports, reduces the quantity of imports and moves a market closer to 
the equilibrium that would exist without trade. Total surplus falls by an amount equal to 
area D 1 F. These two triangles represent the deadweight loss from the tariff. 
The area D 1 F shows the fall in total surplus and represents the deadweight loss of the tariff.
To determine the total welfare effects of the tariff, we add the change in con-
sumer surplus (which is negative), the change in producer surplus (positive), and 
the change in government revenue (positive). We find that total surplus in the 
market decreases by the area D 1 F. This fall in total surplus is called the dead-
weight loss of the tariff.
A tariff causes a deadweight loss because a tariff is a type of tax. Like most 
taxes, it distorts incentives and pushes the allocation of scarce resources away 
from the optimum. In this case, we can identify two effects. First, when the tariff 
raises the domestic price of textiles above the world price, it encourages domestic 
producers to increase production from Q1
S. Even though the cost of making 
these incremental units exceeds the cost of buying them at the world price, the 
tariff makes it profitable for domestic producers to manufacture them nonethe-
less. Second, when the tariff raises the price that domestic textile consumers have 
--- PAGE 204 ---
CHAPTER 9   APPLICATION: INTERNATIONAL TRADE
to pay, it encourages them to reduce their consumption of textiles from Q1
Even though domestic consumers value these incremental units at more than the 
world price, the tariff induces them to cut back their purchases. Area D represents 
the deadweight loss from the overproduction of textiles, and area F represents 
the deadweight loss from the underconsumption of textiles. The total deadweight 
loss of the tariff is the sum of these two triangles.
9-2d The Lessons for Trade Policy
The team of Isolandian economists can now write to the new president:
You asked us three questions about opening up trade. After much hard work, 
Question: If the government allows Isolandians to import and export textiles, 
what will happen to the price of textiles and the quantity of textiles sold in the 
Answer: Once trade is allowed, the Isolandian price of textiles will be driven to 
equal the price prevailing around the world.
If the world price is now higher than the Isolandian price, our price will rise. 
The higher price will reduce the amount of textiles Isolandians consume and 
raise the amount of textiles that Isolandians produce. Isoland will, therefore, 
become a textile exporter. This occurs because, in this case, Isoland has a com-
parative advantage in producing textiles. 
Import Quotas: Another Way to Restrict Trade
eyond tariffs, another way that nations sometimes restrict inter-
national trade is by putting limits on how much of a good can be 
imported. In this book, we will not analyze such a policy, other than to 
point out the c
--- PAGE 205 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
Conversely, if the world price is now lower than the Isolandian price, our 
price will fall. The lower price will raise the amount of textiles that Isolandians 
consume and lower the amount of textiles that Isolandians produce.  Isoland 
will, therefore, become a textile importer. This occurs because, in this case, 
other countries have a comparative advantage in producing textiles. 
Question: Who will gain from free trade in textiles and who will lose, and will 
the gains exceed the losses?
Answer: The answer depends on whether the price rises or falls when trade 
is allowed. If the price rises, producers of textiles gain, and consumers of tex-
tiles lose. If the price falls, consumers gain, and producers lose. In both cases, 
the gains are larger than the losses. Thus, free trade raises the total welfare of 
Question: Should a tariff be part of the new trade policy?
Answer: A tariff has an impact only if Isoland becomes a textile importer. In 
this case, a tariff moves the economy closer to the no-trade equilibrium and, 
like most taxes, causes deadweight losses. A tariff improves the welfare of 
domestic producers and raises revenue for the government, but these gains are 
more than offset by the losses suffered by consumers. The best policy, from the 
standpoint of economic efficiency, would be to allow trade without a tariff.
We hope you find these answers helpful as you decide on your new policy. 
9-2e Other Benefits of International Trade
The conclusions of the Isolandian economics team are based on the standard anal-
ysis of internatio
--- PAGE 206 ---
CHAPTER 9   APPLICATION: INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Free international trade can help the 
Andy Warhol’s Guide to Public 
often ask people in my business — public pol-
icy — where they get their inspiration. Liberals 
usually cite Ronald Reagan.  Personally, I prefer 
the artist Andy Warhol, who famously declared, 
“I like boring things.” He was referring to art, of 
course. But the sentiment provides solid public 
Warhol’s work exalted the everyday “bor-
ing” items that display the transcendental 
beauty of life itself. The canonical example is 
his famous paintings of Campbell Soup cans. 
Some people sneered, but those willing to look 
closely could see what he was doing. It is the 
same idea expressed in an old Zen saying, 
often attributed to the eighth-century Chinese 
Buddhist philosopher Layman Pang: “How 
wondrously supernatural and miraculous! I 
draw water and I carry wood!”
Warhol’s critical insight is usually lost on 
most of the world. This is not because people 
are stupid, but because our brains are wired to 
filter out the mundane and focus on the novel. 
This turns out to be an important survival adap-
tation. To discern a predator, you must filter out 
the constant rustling of leaves and notice the 
Warhol believed that defeating this cognitive 
bias led to greater appreciation of beauty. It also 
leads to better public policy, especially in reliev-
ing poverty. For example, while our attention is 
naturally drawn to the latest fascinating and 
expensive innovations in tropical public health, 
many experts insist it is cheap, boring mosquito 
bed nets that best p
--- PAGE 207 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
r Enhanced flow of ideas. The transfer of technological advances around the 
world is often thought to be linked to the trading of the goods that embody 
those advances. The best way for a poor agricultural nation to learn about 
the computer revolution, for instance, is to buy some computers from abroad 
rather than trying to make them domestically. 
Thus, free international trade increases variety for consumers, allows firms to 
take advantage of economies of scale, makes markets more competitive, and 
 facilitates the spread of technology. If the Isolandian economists also took these 
effects into account, their advice to the president would be even more forceful.
Draw a supply-and-demand diagram for wool suits in the country of 
 Autarka. When trade is allowed, the price of a suit falls from 3 to 2 ounces 
of gold. In your diagram, show the change in consumer surplus, the change in producer sur-
plus, and the change in total surplus. How would a tariff on suit imports alter these effects?
9-3 The Arguments for Restricting Trade
The letter from the economics team starts to persuade the new president of 
 Isoland to consider allowing trade in textiles. She notes that the domestic price 
is now high compared to the world price. Free trade would, therefore, cause the 
price of textiles to fall and hurt domestic textile producers. Before implementing 
the new policy, she asks Isolandian textile companies to comment on the econo-
Not surprisingly, the textile companies oppose free trade in textiles. They 
believe that the government should prot
--- PAGE 208 ---
CHAPTER 9   APPLICATION: INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Politicians and pundits often say that 
the government should help workers 
made worse off by international trade 
by, for example, paying for their retrain-
ing. In this opinion piece, an economist 
What to Expect When You’re Free 
ll economists know that when American jobs 
are outsourced, Americans as a group are 
net winners. What we lose through lower wages 
is more than offset by what we gain through 
lower prices. In other words, the winners can 
more than afford to compensate the losers. Does 
that mean they ought to? Does it create a moral 
mandate for taxpayer- subsidized retraining pro-
Um, no. Even if you’ve just lost your job, 
there’s something fundamentally churlish about 
blaming the very phenomenon that’s elevated 
you above the subsistence level since the day 
you were born. If the world owes you compensa-
tion for enduring the downside of trade, what do 
you owe the world for enjoying the upside?
I doubt there’s a human being on earth 
who hasn’t benefited from the opportunity to 
trade freely with his neighbors. Imagine what 
your life would be like if you had to grow your 
own food, make your own clothes and rely on 
your grandmother’s home remedies for health 
care. Access to a trained physician might 
reduce the demand for grandma’s home reme-
dies, but—especially at her age—she’s still 
got plenty of reason to be thankful for having a 
Some people suggest, however, that it makes 
sense to isolate the moral effects of a single 
new trading opportunity or free trade agreement. 
Surely we have fellow citizens
--- PAGE 209 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
industry to those industries in which Isoland has a comparative advantage. The 
transition may impose hardship on some workers in the short run, but it allows 
Isolandians as a whole to enjoy a higher standard of living.
Opponents of trade are often skeptical that trade creates jobs. They might 
respond that everything can be produced more cheaply abroad. Under free trade, 
they might argue, Isolandians could not be profitably employed in any industry. 
As Chapter 3 explains, however, the gains from trade are based on comparative 
advantage, not absolute advantage. Even if one country is better than another 
country at producing everything, each country can still gain from trading with the 
other. Workers in each country will eventually find jobs in an industry in which 
that country has a comparative advantage.
9-3b The National-Security Argument
When an industry is threatened with competition from other countries, oppo-
nents of free trade often argue that the industry is vital to national security. For 
example, if Isoland were considering free trade in steel, domestic steel companies 
might point out that steel is used to make guns and tanks. Free trade would allow 
Isoland to become dependent on foreign countries to supply steel. If a war later 
broke out and the foreign supply was interrupted, Isoland might be unable to 
produce enough steel and weapons to defend itself.
Economists acknowledge that protecting key industries may be appropriate 
when there are legitimate concerns over national security. Yet they fear that this 
argument ma
--- PAGE 210 ---
CHAPTER 9   APPLICATION: INTERNATIONAL TRADE
willing to incur temporary losses to obtain the eventual profits. Protection is not 
necessary for an infant industry to grow. History shows that start-up firms often 
incur temporary losses and succeed in the long run, even without protection from 
9-3d The Unfair-Competition Argument
A common argument is that free trade is desirable only if all countries play by 
the same rules. If firms in different countries are subject to different laws and 
regulations, then it is unfair (the argument goes) to expect the firms to compete 
in the international marketplace. For instance, suppose that the government of 
Neighborland subsidizes its textile industry by giving textile companies large tax 
breaks. The Isolandian textile industry might argue that it should be protected 
from this foreign competition because Neighborland is not competing fairly.
Would it, in fact, hurt Isoland to buy textiles from another country at a subsi-
dized price? Certainly, Isolandian textile producers would suffer, but Isolandian 
textile consumers would benefit from the low price. The case for free trade is the 
same as before: The gains of the consumers from buying at the low price would 
exceed the losses of the producers. Neighborland’s subsidy to its textile indus-
try may be a bad policy, but it is the taxpayers of Neighborland who bear the 
burden. Isoland can benefit from the opportunity to buy textiles at a subsidized 
price. Rather than objecting to the foreign subsidies, perhaps Isoland should send 
Neighborland a thank-you note.
9-3e The Protect
--- PAGE 211 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
to found GATT after World War II in response to the high tar-
iffs imposed during the Great Depression of the 1930s. Many 
economists believe that the high tariffs contributed to the world-
wide economic hardship of that period. GATT has successfully 
reduced the average tariff among member countries from about 
40 percent after World War II to about 5 percent today.
The rules established under GATT are now enforced by an 
international institution called the World Trade Organization 
(WTO). The WTO was established in 1995 and has its headquar-
ters in Geneva, Switzerland. As of 2015, 162 countries have joined 
the organization, accounting for more than 97 percent of world 
trade. The functions of the WTO are to administer trade agree-
ments, provide a forum for negotiations, and handle disputes 
What are the pros and cons of the multilateral approach to 
free trade? One advantage is that the multilateral approach has 
the potential to result in freer trade than a unilateral approach 
because it can reduce trade restrictions abroad as well as at home. If 
international negotiations fail, however, the result could be more 
restricted trade than under a unilateral approach.
In addition, the multilateral approach may have a political 
advantage. In most markets, producers are fewer and better 
 organized than consumers—and thus wield greater political 
 influence. Reducing the Isolandian tariff on textiles, for example, 
may be politically difficult if considered by itself. The textile com-
panies would oppose free trade, and the buyers of textil
--- PAGE 212 ---
CHAPTER 9   APPLICATION: INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Economists view the United States as an ongoing experiment that confirms the 
virtues of free trade. Throughout its history, the United States has allowed unre-
stricted trade among the states, and the country as a whole has benefited from 
the specialization that trade allows. Florida grows oranges, Alaska pumps oil, 
California makes wine, and so on. Americans would not enjoy the high standard 
of living they do today if people could consume only those goods and services 
produced in their own states. The world could similarly benefit from free trade 
To better understand economists’ view of trade, let’s continue our parable. 
Suppose that the president of Isoland, after reading the latest poll results, ignores 
the advice of her economics team and decides not to allow free trade in textiles. 
The country remains in the equilibrium without international trade.
Then, one day, some Isolandian inventor discovers a new way to make tex-
tiles at very low cost. The process is quite mysterious, however, and the inventor 
insists on keeping it a secret. What is odd is that the inventor doesn’t need tradi-
tional inputs such as cotton or wool. The only material input he needs is wheat. 
And even more oddly, to manufacture textiles from wheat, he hardly needs any 
The inventor is hailed as a genius. Because everyone buys clothing, the lower 
cost of textiles allows all Isolandians to enjoy a higher standard of living. Work-
ers who had previously produced textiles experience some hardship when their 
factories close, but they eventually 
--- PAGE 213 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
2. When the nation of Ectenia opens itself to world trade 
in coffee beans, the domestic price of coffee beans 
falls. Which of the following describes the situation?
a. Domestic production of coffee rises, and Ectenia 
becomes a coffee importer.
b. Domestic production of coffee rises, and Ectenia 
becomes a coffee exporter.
c. Domestic production of coffee falls, and Ectenia 
becomes a coffee importer.
d. Domestic production of coffee falls, and Ectenia 
becomes a coffee exporter.
3. When a nation opens itself to trade in a good and be-
a. producer surplus decreases, but consumer surplus 
and total surplus both increase.
b. producer surplus decreases, consumer surplus 
increases, and so the impact on total surplus is 
c. producer surplus and total surplus increase, but 
consumer surplus decreases.
d. producer surplus, consumer surplus, and total sur-
4. If a nation that imports a good imposes a tariff, it will 
a. the domestic quantity demanded.
b. the domestic quantity supplied.
c. the quantity imported from abroad.
5. Which of the following trade policies would benefit 
producers, hurt consumers, and increase the amount 
a. the increase of a tariff in an importing country
b. the reduction of a tariff in an importing country
c. starting to allow trade when the world price is 
greater than the domestic price
d. starting to allow trade when the world price is less 
6. The main difference between imposing a tariff and 
handing out licenses under an import quota is that a 
r The effects of free trade can be determined by com-
paring the domesti
--- PAGE 214 ---
CHAPTER 9   APPLICATION: INTERNATIONAL TRADE
3. Draw the supply-and-demand diagram for an import-
ing country. Identify consumer surplus and producer 
surplus before trade is allowed. Identify consumer 
surplus and producer surplus with free trade. What is 
the change in total surplus?
4. Describe what a tariff is and its economic effects.
5. List five arguments often given to support trade 
restrictions. How do economists respond to these 
6. What is the difference between the unilateral and mul-
tilateral approaches to achieving free trade? Give an 
1. The world price of wine is below the price that would 
prevail in Canada in the absence of trade.
a. Assuming that Canadian imports of wine are a 
small part of total world wine production, draw 
a graph for the Canadian market for wine under 
free trade. Identify consumer surplus, producer 
surplus, and total surplus in an appropriate table.
b. Now suppose that an unusual shift of the Gulf 
Stream leads to an unseasonably cold summer 
in Europe, destroying much of the grape har-
vest there. What effect does this shock have on 
the world price of wine? Using your graph and 
table from part (a), show the effect on consumer 
surplus, producer surplus, and total surplus 
in  Canada. Who are the winners and losers? 
Is  Canada as a whole better or worse off?
2. Suppose that Congress imposes a tariff on imported 
automobiles to protect the U.S. auto industry from 
foreign competition. Assuming that the United States 
is a price taker in the world auto market, show the 
following on a diagram: the change in the quantity of 
impor
--- PAGE 215 ---
PART III   MARKETS AND WELFARE
c. How does it affect the welfare of domestic con-
sumers, the welfare of domestic producers, and 
d. What happens to total welfare in China, as mea-
sured by the sum of consumer surplus, producer 
7. Consider a country that imports a good from abroad. 
For each of following statements, state whether it is 
true or false. Explain your answer.
a. “The greater the elasticity of demand, the greater 
b. “If demand is perfectly inelastic, there are no 
c. “If demand is perfectly inelastic, consumers do 
8. Having rejected a tariff on textiles (a tax on imports), 
the president of Isoland is now considering the same-
sized tax on textile consumption (including both  
imported and domestically produced textiles).
a. Using Figure 4, identify the quantity consumed 
and the quantity produced in Isoland under a tex-
b. Construct a table similar to that in Figure 4 for the 
c. Which raises more revenue for the government—
the consumption tax or the tariff?  Which has a 
smaller deadweight loss? Explain.
9. Assume the United States is an importer of televisions 
and there are no trade restrictions. U.S. consumers 
buy 1 million televisions per year, of which 400,000 are 
produced domestically and 600,000 are imported. 
a. Suppose that a technological advance among 
 Japanese television manufacturers causes the 
world price of televisions to fall by $100. Draw a 
graph to show how this change affects the welfare 
of U.S. consumers and U.S. producers and how it 
affects total surplus in the United States.
b. After the fall in price, consumers buy 1.2 million
--- PAGE 216 ---

