--- PAGE 276 ---
he economy is made up of thousands of firms that produce the goods and 
services you enjoy every day: General Motors produces automobiles, General 
Electric produces lightbulbs, and General Mills produces breakfast cereals. 
Some firms, such as these three, are large; they employ thousands of workers and 
have thousands of stockholders who share the firms’ profits. Other firms, such as 
the local barbershop or café, are small; they employ only a few workers and are 
owned by a single person or family.
In previous chapters, we used the supply curve to summarize firms’ produc-
tion decisions. According to the law of supply, firms are willing to produce 
--- PAGE 277 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
and sell a greater quantity of a good when the price of the good is higher. This 
response leads to a supply curve that slopes upward. For analyzing many ques-
tions, the law of supply is all you need to know about firm behavior.
In this chapter and the ones that follow, we examine firm behavior in more 
detail. This topic will give you a better understanding of the decisions behind 
the supply curve. In addition, it will introduce you to a part of economics called 
industrial organization—the study of how firms’ decisions about prices and quan-
tities depend on the market conditions they face. The town in which you live, for 
instance, may have several pizzerias but only one cable television company. This 
raises a key question: How does the number of firms affect the prices in a  market 
and the efficiency of the market outcome? The field of industrial organization 
 addresses exactly this question.
Before turning to these issues, we need to discuss the costs of production. All 
firms, from Delta Air Lines to your local deli, incur costs while making the goods 
and services that they sell. As we will see in the coming chapters, a firm’s costs 
are a key determinant of its production and pricing decisions. In this chapter, we 
define some of the variables that economists use to measure a firm’s costs, and we 
consider the
--- PAGE 278 ---
CHAPTER 13   THE COSTS OF PRODUCTION
output. If Caroline produces 10,000 cookies and sells them at $2 a cookie, her total 
revenue is $20,000. The measurement of a firm’s total cost, however, is more subtle.
13-1b Costs as Opportunity Costs
When measuring costs at Caroline’s Cookie Factory or any other firm, it is import-
ant to keep in mind one of the Ten Principles of Economics from Chapter 1: The cost 
of something is what you give up to get it. Recall that the opportunity cost of an 
item refers to all the things that must be forgone to acquire that item. When econ-
omists speak of a firm’s cost of production, they include all the opportunity costs 
of making its output of goods and services.
While some of a firm’s opportunity costs of production are obvious, others are 
less so. When Caroline pays $1,000 for flour, that $1,000 is an opportunity cost 
because Caroline can no longer use that $1,000 to buy something else. Similarly, 
when Caroline hires workers to make the cookies, the wages she pays are part of 
the firm’s costs. Because these opportunity costs require the firm to pay out some 
money, they are called explicit costs. By contrast, some of a firm’s opportunity 
costs, called implicit costs, do not require a cash outlay. Imagine that Caroline 
is skilled with computers and could earn $100 per hour working as a program-
mer. For every hour that Caroline works at 
--- PAGE 279 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
implicit cost of her business. Caroline’s accountant, however, will not show this 
$15,000 as a cost because no money flows out of the business to pay for it.
To further explore the difference between the methods of economists and 
accountants, let’s change the example slightly. Suppose now that Caroline did 
not have the entire $300,000 to buy the factory but, instead, used $100,000 of her 
own savings and borrowed $200,000 from a bank at an interest rate of 5 percent. 
Caroline’s accountant, who only measures explicit costs, will now count the 
$10,000 interest paid on the bank loan every year as a cost because this amount 
of money now flows out of the firm. By contrast, according to an economist, the 
opportunity cost of owning the business is still $15,000. The opportunity cost 
equals the interest on the bank loan (an explicit cost of $10,000) plus the forgone 
interest on savings (an implicit cost of $5,000). 
13-1d Economic Profit versus Accounting Profit
Now let’s return to the firm’s objective: profit. Because economists and accoun-
tants measure costs differently, they also measure profit differently. An econo-
mist measures a firm’s economic profit as the firm’s total revenue minus all the 
opportunity costs (explicit and implicit) of producing the goods and services sold. 
An accountant measures the firm’s acc
--- PAGE 280 ---
CHAPTER 13   THE COSTS OF PRODUCTION
the firm owners will eventually close down the business and exit the industry. To 
understand business decisions, we need to keep an eye on economic profit.
Farmer McDonald gives banjo lessons for $20 an hour. One day, he spends 
10 hours planting $100 worth of seeds on his farm. What opportunity 
cost has he incurred? What cost would his accountant measure? If these seeds yield $200 
worth of crops, does McDonald earn an accounting profit? Does he earn an economic profit? 
13-2 Production and Costs 
Firms incur costs when they buy inputs to produce the goods and services that 
they plan to sell. In this section, we examine the link between a firm’s production 
process and its total cost. Once again, we consider Caroline’s Cookie Factory.
In the analysis that follows, we make an important simplifying assumption: 
We assume that the size of Caroline’s factory is fixed and that Caroline can vary 
the quantity of cookies produced only by changing the number of workers she 
employs. This assumption is realistic in the short run but not in the long run. That 
is, Caroline cannot build a larger factory overnight, but she could do so over the 
next year or two. This analysis, therefore, describes the production decisions that 
Caroline faces in the short run. We examine the relationship between costs and 
time horizon more fully later in the chapte
--- PAGE 281 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
When there is 1 worker, she produces 50 cookies. When there are 2 workers, 
she produces 90 cookies and so on. Panel (a) of Figure 2 presents a graph of 
these two columns of numbers. The number of workers is on the horizontal 
axis, and the number of cookies produced is on the vertical axis. This relation-
ship between the quantity of inputs (workers) and quantity of output (cookies) 
is called the  production function.
One of the Ten Principles of Economics introduced in Chapter 1 is that ratio-
nal people think at the margin. As we will see in future chapters, this idea is 
the key to understanding the decisions a firm makes about how many workers 
to hire and how much output to produce. To take a step toward understanding 
these decisions, column (3) in the table gives the marginal product of a worker. 
The marginal product of any input in the production process is the increase in 
the quantity of output obtained from one additional unit of that input. When the 
number of workers goes from 1 to 2, cookie production increases from 50 to 90, so 
the marginal product of the second worker is 40 cookies. And when the number of 
the quantity of output of 
The production function in panel (a) shows the relationship between the number of workers 
hired and the quantity of output produced. Here the number of workers hired (on t
--- PAGE 282 ---
CHAPTER 13   THE COSTS OF PRODUCTION
workers goes from 2 to 3, cookie production increases from 90 to 120, so the mar-
ginal product of the third worker is 30 cookies. In the table, the marginal product 
is shown halfway between two rows because it represents the change in output as 
the number of workers increases from one level to another.
Notice that as the number of workers increases, the marginal product declines. 
The second worker has a marginal product of 40 cookies, the third worker has 
a marginal product of 30 cookies, and the fourth worker has a marginal prod-
uct of 20 cookies. This property is called diminishing marginal product. At first, 
when only a few workers are hired, they have easy access to Caroline’s kitchen 
equipment. As the number of workers increases, additional workers have to 
share equipment and work in more crowded conditions. Eventually, the kitchen 
 becomes so overcrowded that workers often get in each other’s way. Hence, as 
more workers are hired, each additional worker contributes fewer additional 
cookies to total production. 
Diminishing marginal product is also apparent in Figure 2. The produc-
tion function’s slope (“rise over run”) tells us the change in Caroline’s output 
of cookies (“rise”) for each additional input of labor (“run”). That is, the slope 
of the production function measures the marginal product. As the number of 
worke
--- PAGE 283 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
Our analysis of Caroline’s Cookie Factory demonstrated how a firm’s total cost 
reflects its production function. From data on a firm’s total cost, we can derive 
several related measures of cost, which will turn out to be useful when we ana-
lyze production and pricing decisions in future chapters. To see how these related 
measures are derived, we consider the example in Table 2. This table presents cost 
data on Caroline’s neighbor—Conrad’s Coffee Shop.
Column (1) in the table shows the number of cups of coffee that Conrad might 
produce, ranging from 0 to 10 cups per hour. Column (2) shows Conrad’s total 
cost of producing coffee. Figure 3 plots Conrad’s total-cost curve. The quantity of 
coffee [from column (1)] is on the horizontal axis, and total cost [from column (2)] 
is on the vertical axis. Conrad’s total-cost curve has a shape similar to Caroline’s. 
In particular, it becomes steeper as the quantity produced rises, which (as we have 
discussed) reflects diminishing marginal product.
13-3 The Various Measures of Cost
Cost: Conrad’s Coffee Shop
--- PAGE 284 ---
CHAPTER 13   THE COSTS OF PRODUCTION
13-3a Fixed and Variable Costs
Conrad’s total cost can be divided into two types. Some costs, called fixed costs, 
do not vary with the quantity of output produced. They are incurred even if 
the firm produces nothing at all. Conrad’s fixed costs include any rent he pays 
because this cost is the same regardless of how much coffee he produces. Sim-
ilarly, if Conrad needs to hire a full-time bookkeeper to pay bills, regardless of 
the quantity of coffee produced, the bookkeeper’s salary is a fixed cost. The third 
column in Table 2 shows Conrad’s fixed cost, which in this example is $3.00.
Some of the firm’s costs, called variable costs, change as the firm alters the quan-
tity of output produced. Conrad’s variable costs include the cost of coffee beans, 
milk, sugar, and paper cups: The more cups of coffee Conrad makes, the more of 
these items he needs to buy. Similarly, if Conrad has to hire more workers to make 
more cups of coffee, the salaries of these workers are variable costs. Column (4) in 
the table shows Conrad’s variable cost. The variable cost is 0 if he produces noth-
ing, $0.30 if he produces 1 cup of coffee, $0.80 if he produces 2 cups, and so on.
A firm’s total cost is the sum of fixed and variable costs. In Table 2, total cost in 
column (2) equals fixed cost in column (3) plus variable cost in column (4).
13-3b Average an
--- PAGE 285 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
These two questions might seem to have the same answer, but they do not. Both 
answers are important for understanding how firms make production decisions.
To find the cost of the typical unit produced, we divide the firm’s costs by the 
quantity of output it produces. For example, if the firm produces 2 cups of coffee 
per hour, its total cost is $3.80, and the cost of the typical cup is $3.80/2, or $1.90. 
Total cost divided by the quantity of output is called average total cost. Because 
total cost is the sum of fixed and variable costs, average total cost can be expressed 
as the sum of average fixed cost and average variable cost. Average fixed cost is 
the fixed cost divided by the quantity of output, and average variable cost is the 
variable cost divided by the quantity of output.
Average total cost tells us the cost of the typical unit, but it does not tell us how 
much total cost will change as the firm alters its level of production. Column (8) in 
Table 2 shows the amount that total cost rises when the firm increases production 
by 1 unit of output. This number is called marginal cost. For example, if Conrad 
increases production from 2 to 3 cups, total cost rises from $3.80 to $4.50, so the 
marginal cost of the third cup of coffee is $4.50 minus $3.80, or $0.70. In the table, 
the marginal cost appears halfwa
--- PAGE 286 ---
CHAPTER 13   THE COSTS OF PRODUCTION
Rising Marginal Cost  Conrad’s marginal cost rises as the quantity of output pro-
duced increases. This upward slope reflects the property of diminishing marginal 
product. When Conrad produces a small quantity of coffee, he has few  workers, 
and much of his equipment is not used. Because he can easily put these idle 
 resources to use, the marginal product of an extra worker is large, and the mar-
ginal cost of an extra cup of coffee is small. By contrast, when Conrad produces 
a large quantity of coffee, his shop is crowded with workers, and most of his 
 equipment is fully utilized. Conrad can produce more coffee by adding workers, 
but these new workers have to work in crowded conditions and may have to wait 
to use the equipment. Therefore, when the quantity of coffee produced is already 
high, the marginal product of an extra worker is low, and the marginal cost of an 
extra cup of coffee is large.
U-Shaped Average Total Cost  Conrad’s average-total-cost curve is U-shaped, as 
shown in Figure 4. To understand why, remember that average total cost is the 
sum of average fixed cost and average variable cost. Average fixed cost always 
declines as output rises because the fixed cost is getting spread over a larger num-
ber of units. Average variable cost usually rises as output increases because of 
diminishing marginal product. 
Average
--- PAGE 287 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
increases, the fixed cost is spread over more units. Average fixed cost declines, 
rapidly at first and then more slowly. As a result, average total cost also declines 
until the firm’s output reaches 5 cups of coffee per hour, when average total cost 
is $1.30 per cup. When the firm produces more than 6 cups per hour, however, the 
increase in average variable cost becomes the dominant force, and average total 
cost starts rising. The tug of war between average fixed cost and average variable 
cost generates the U-shape in average total cost.
The bottom of the U-shape occurs at the quantity that minimizes average total 
cost. This quantity is sometimes called the efficient scale of the firm. For Conrad, 
the efficient scale is 5 or 6 cups of coffee per hour. If he produces more or less than 
this amount, his average total cost rises above the minimum of $1.30. At lower 
levels of output, average total cost is higher than $1.30 because the fixed cost is 
spread over so few units. At higher levels of output, average total cost is higher 
than $1.30 because the marginal product of inputs has diminished significantly. 
At the efficient scale, these two forces are balanced to yield the lowest average 
The Relationship between Marginal Cost and Average Total Cost  If you look at 
Figure 4 (or back at Table 2), you will see some
--- PAGE 288 ---
CHAPTER 13   THE COSTS OF PRODUCTION
Figure 5 shows the cost curves for such a firm, including average total 
cost (ATC), average fixed cost (AFC), average variable cost (AVC), and marginal 
cost (MC). At low levels of output, the firm experiences increasing marginal prod-
uct, and the marginal-cost curve falls. Eventually, the firm starts to experience 
diminishing marginal product, and the marginal-cost curve starts to rise. This 
combination of increasing then diminishing marginal product also makes the 
average-variable-cost curve U-shaped. 
Despite these differences from our previous example, the cost curves in Figure 5 
share the three properties that are most important to remember:
• Marginal cost eventually rises with the quantity of output. 
• The average-total-cost curve is U-shaped.
• The marginal-cost curve crosses the average-total-cost curve at the minimum 
Suppose Honda’s total cost of producing 4 cars is $225,000 and its total 
cost of producing 5 cars is $250,000. What is the average total cost of 
producing 5 cars? What is the marginal cost of the fifth car? • Draw the marginal-cost curve 
and the average-total-cost curve for a typical firm, and explain why these curves cross where 
13-4 Costs in the Short Run and in the Long Run
We noted earlier in this chapter that a firm’s costs might depend on the time 
horizon under consideration. Let’s examine more preci
--- PAGE 289 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
13-4a  The Relationship between Short-Run  
and Long-Run Average Total Cost 
For many firms, the division of total costs between fixed and variable costs 
depends on the time horizon. Consider, for instance, a car manufacturer such as 
Ford Motor Company. Over a period of only a few months, Ford cannot adjust the 
number or sizes of its car factories. The only way it can produce additional cars 
is to hire more workers at the factories it already has. The cost of these factories 
is, therefore, a fixed cost in the short run. By contrast, over a period of several 
years, Ford can expand the size of its factories, build new factories, or close old 
ones. Thus, the cost of its factories is a variable cost in the long run.
Because many decisions are fixed in the short run but variable in the long run, 
a firm’s long-run cost curves differ from its short-run cost curves. Figure 6 shows 
an example. The figure presents three short-run average-total-cost curves—for a 
small, medium, and large factory. It also presents the long-run average-total-cost 
curve. As the firm moves along the long-run curve, it is adjusting the size of the 
factory to the quantity of production.
This graph shows how short-run and long-run costs are related. The long-run 
average-total-cost curve has a much flatter U-shape than the short-run average-
tota
--- PAGE 290 ---
CHAPTER 13   THE COSTS OF PRODUCTION
How long does it take a firm to get to the long run? The answer depends on 
the firm. It can take a year or more for a major manufacturing firm, such as a car 
company, to build a larger factory. By contrast, a person running a coffee shop can 
buy another coffee maker within a few days. There is, therefore, no single answer 
to the question of how long it takes a firm to adjust its production facilities.
13-4b Economies and Diseconomies of Scale
The shape of the long-run average-total-cost curve conveys important informa-
tion about the production processes that a firm has available for manufacturing a 
good. In particular, it tells us how costs vary with the scale—that is, the size—of a 
firm’s operations. When long-run average total cost declines as output increases, 
there are said to be economies of scale. When long-run average total cost rises as 
output increases, there are said to be diseconomies of scale. When long-run aver-
age total cost does not vary with the level of output, there are said to be constant 
returns to scale. As we can see in Figure 6, Ford has economies of scale at low 
levels of output, constant returns to scale at intermediate levels of output, and 
diseconomies of scale at high levels of output. 
What might cause economies or diseconomies of scale? Economies of scale 
often arise because higher production level
--- PAGE 291 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
This analysis shows why long-run average-total-cost curves are often 
U-shaped. At low levels of production, the firm benefits from increased size 
because it can take advantage of greater specialization. Coordination problems, 
meanwhile, are not yet acute. By contrast, at high levels of production, the benefits 
of specialization have already been realized, and coordination problems become 
more severe as the firm grows larger. Thus, long-run average total cost is falling 
at low levels of production because of increasing specialization and rising at high 
levels of production because of growing coordination problems.
If Boeing produces 9 jets per month, its long-run total cost is $9.0 million 
per month. If it produces 10 jets per month, its long-run total cost is 
$9.5 million per month. Does Boeing exhibit economies or diseconomies of scale?
Costs that require an outlay 
Costs that do not require an outlay 
Costs that do not vary with the 
quantity of output produced
Costs that vary with the quantity 
The market value of all the inputs 
that a firm uses in production
Fixed cost divided by the quantity 
Variable cost divided by the quantity 
Total cost divided by the quantity of 
The increase in total cost that arises 
from an extra unit of production
The purpose of this chapter has been to develop some tools to study 
--- PAGE 292 ---
CHAPTER 13   THE COSTS OF PRODUCTION
• The goal of firms is to maximize profit, which equals 
total revenue minus total cost. 
• When analyzing a firm’s behavior, it is important to 
 include all the opportunity costs of production. Some of 
the opportunity costs, such as the wages a firm pays its 
workers, are explicit. Other opportunity costs, such as the 
wages the firm owner gives up by working at the firm 
rather than taking another job, are implicit. Economic 
profit takes both explicit and implicit costs into account, 
whereas accounting profit considers only explicit costs.
• A firm’s costs reflect its production process. A typical 
firm’s production function gets flatter as the quantity 
of an input increases, displaying the property of dimin-
ishing marginal product. As a result, a firm’s total-cost 
curve gets steeper as the quantity produced rises.
• A firm’s total costs can be divided into fixed costs and 
variable costs. Fixed costs are costs that do not change 
when the firm alters the quantity of output produced. 
Variable costs are costs that change when the firm 
 alters the quantity of output produced. 
• From a firm’s total cost, two related measures of cost 
are derived. Average total cost is total cost divided by 
the quantity of output. Marginal cost is the amount by 
which total cost rises if output increases by 1 unit.
• When analyzing firm behavior, it
--- PAGE 293 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
1. What is the relationship between a firm’s total  
revenue, profit, and total cost?
2. Give an example of an opportunity cost that an  
accountant would not count as a cost. Why would the 
accountant ignore this cost?
3. What is marginal product, and what does it mean if it 
4. Draw a production function that exhibits diminishing 
marginal product of labor. Draw the associated  
total-cost curve. (In both cases, be sure to label the axes.) 
Explain the shapes of the two curves you have drawn.
5. Define total cost, average total cost, and marginal cost. 
6. Draw the marginal-cost and average-total-cost  
curves for a typical firm. Explain why the curves have 
the shapes that they do and why they intersect where 
7. How and why does a firm’s average-total-cost curve 
differ in the short run compared with the long run? 
8. Define economies of scale and explain why they might 
arise. Define diseconomies of scale and explain why they 
production function, p. 252
diminishing marginal product, p. 253
average total cost, p. 256
average fixed cost, p. 256
average variable cost, p. 256
economies of scale, p. 261
diseconomies of scale, p. 261
constant returns to scale, p. 261
1. This chapter discusses many types of costs: 
 opportunity cost, total cost, fixed cost, variable cost, 
average total cost, and marginal cost. Fill in the 
--- PAGE 294 ---
CHAPTER 13   THE COSTS OF PRODUCTION
b. Use these data to graph the fisherman’s  
production function. Explain its shape.
c. The fisherman has a fixed cost of $10 (his pole). 
The opportunity cost of his time is $5 per hour. 
Graph the fisherman’s total-cost curve. Explain  
4. Nimbus, Inc., makes brooms and then sells them door-
to-door. Here is the relationship between the number 
of workers and Nimbus’s output during a given day:
a. Fill in the column of marginal products. What  
pattern do you see? How might you explain it?
b. A worker costs $100 a day, and the firm has fixed 
costs of $200. Use this information to fill in the  
c. Fill in the column for average total cost. (Recall 
that ATC 5 TC/Q.) What pattern do you see? 
d. Now fill in the column for marginal cost. (Recall 
that MC 5 ΔTC/ΔQ.) What pattern do you see? 
e. Compare the column for marginal product 
with the column for marginal cost. Explain the 
f. Compare the column for average total cost 
with the column for marginal cost. Explain the 
5. You are the chief financial officer for a firm that sells 
digital music players. Your firm has the following  
average-total-cost schedule:
 Your current level of production is 600 devices,  
all of which have been sold. Someone calls, desperate 
to buy one of your music players. The caller offers  
you $550 for it. Should you accept the offer?  
6. Consider the follow
--- PAGE 295 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
9. Jane’s Juice Bar has the following cost schedules:
a. Calculate average variable cost, average total  
cost, and marginal cost for each quantity.
b. Graph all three curves. What is the relationship 
between the marginal-cost curve and the  
average-total-cost curve? Between the  
marginal-cost curve and the average-variable- 
10. Consider the following table of long-run total costs for 
   Does each of these firms experience economies of scale 
--- PAGE 296 ---
f your local gas station raised its price for gasoline by 20 percent, it would see a 
large drop in the amount of gasoline it sold. Its customers would quickly switch 
to buying their gasoline at other gas stations. By contrast, if your local water com-
pany raised the price of water by 20 percent, it would see only a small decrease in 
the amount of water it sold. People might water their lawns less often and buy more 
water-efficient showerheads, but they would be hard-pressed to reduce  water con-
sumption greatly or to find another supplier. The difference between the gasoline 
market and the water market is that many firms supply gasoline to the local mar-
ket, but only one firm supplies water. As you might expect, this difference in 
 market structure shapes the pricing and production decisions of the firms 
that operate in these markets.
--- PAGE 297 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
In this chapter, we examine the behavior of competitive firms, such as your 
local gas station. You may recall that a market is competitive if each buyer and 
seller is small compared to the size of the market and, therefore, has little ability 
to influence market prices. By contrast, if a firm can influence the market price of 
the good it sells, it is said to have market power. Later in the book, we examine the 
behavior of firms with market power, such as your local water company.
Our analysis of competitive firms in this chapter sheds light on the decisions 
that lie behind the supply curve in a competitive market. Not surprisingly, we 
find that a market supply curve is tightly linked to firms’ costs of production. 
Less obvious, however, is the question of which among a firm’s many types of 
cost—fixed, variable, average, and marginal—are most relevant for its supply 
decisions. We see that all these measures of cost play important and interre-
14-1 What Is a Competitive Market?
Our goal in this chapter is to examine how firms make production decisions in 
competitive markets. As a background for this analysis, we begin by reviewing 
what a competitive market is.
14-1a The Meaning of Competition
A competitive market, sometimes called a perfectly competitive market, has two 
• There are many buyers and many sellers i
--- PAGE 298 ---
CHAPTER 14   FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
14-1b The Revenue of a Competitive Firm
A firm in a competitive market, like most other firms in the economy, tries to max-
imize profit (total revenue minus total cost). To see how it does this, we first con-
sider the revenue of a competitive firm. To keep matters concrete, let’s consider a 
specific firm: the Vaca Family Dairy Farm.
The Vaca Farm produces a quantity of milk, Q, and sells each unit at the market 
price, P. The farm’s total revenue is P 3 Q. For example, if a gallon of milk sells 
for $6 and the farm sells 1,000 gallons, its total revenue is $6,000.
Because the Vaca Farm is small compared to the world market for milk, it takes 
the price as given by market conditions. This means, in particular, that the price 
of milk does not depend on the number of gallons that the Vaca Farm produces 
and sells. If the Vacas double the amount of milk they produce to 2,000 gallons, 
the price of milk remains the same, and their total revenue doubles to $12,000. As 
a result, total revenue is proportional to the amount of output.
Table 1 shows the revenue for the Vaca Family Dairy Farm. Columns (1) and (2) 
show the amount of output the farm produces and the price at which it sells its 
output. Column (3) is the farm’s total revenue. The table assumes that the price of 
milk is $6 a gallon, so total revenue is $6 times the number of ga
--- PAGE 299 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
Column (4) in the table shows average revenue, which is total revenue [from 
column (3)] divided by the amount of output [from column (1)]. Average revenue 
tells us how much revenue a firm receives for the typical unit sold. In Table 1, you 
can see that average revenue equals $6, the price of a gallon of milk. This illus-
trates a general lesson that applies not only to competitive firms but to other firms 
as well. Average revenue is total revenue (P 3 Q) divided by the quantity (Q). 
Therefore, for all types of firms, average revenue equals the price of the good.
Column (5) shows marginal revenue, which is the change in total revenue from 
the sale of each additional unit of output. In Table 1, marginal revenue equals $6, 
the price of a gallon of milk. This result illustrates a lesson that applies only to 
competitive firms. Total revenue is P 3 Q, and P is fixed for a competitive firm. 
Therefore, when Q rises by 1 unit, total revenue rises by P dollars. For competitive 
firms, marginal revenue equals the price of the good.
When a competitive firm doubles the amount it sells, what happens to the 
price of its output and its total revenue?
14-2  Profit Maximization and the Competitive Firm’s 
The goal of a firm is to maximize profit, which equals total revenue minus 
total cost. We have just discussed the competitive 
--- PAGE 300 ---
CHAPTER 14   FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
revenue exceeds marginal cost, increasing the quantity produced raises profit. 
Once the Vaca Farm has reached 5 gallons of milk, however, the situation changes. 
The sixth gallon would have a marginal revenue of $6 and a marginal cost of $7, 
so producing it would reduce profit by $1 (from $7 to $6). As a result, the Vacas 
would not produce beyond 5 gallons.
One of the Ten Principles of Economics in Chapter 1 is that rational people think 
at the margin. We now see how the Vaca Family Dairy Farm can apply this prin-
ciple. If marginal revenue is greater than marginal cost—as it is at 1, 2, and 3 
 gallons—the Vacas should increase the production of milk because it will put 
more money in their pockets (marginal revenue) than it takes out (marginal cost). 
If marginal revenue is less than marginal cost—as it is at 6, 7, and 8 gallons—
the Vacas should decrease production. If the Vacas think at the margin and make 
incremental adjustments to the level of production, they end up producing the 
 profit-maximizing quantity.
14-2b The Marginal-Cost Curve and the Firm’s Supply Decision
To extend this analysis of profit maximization, consider the cost curves in 
Figure 1. These cost curves have the three features that, as we discussed in the 
previous chapter, are thought to describe most firms: The marginal-cost curve 
(MC) is upward-sloping
--- PAGE 301 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
This figure shows the marginal-cost curve (MC), the average-total-cost curve (ATC), and 
the average-variable-cost curve (AVC). It also shows the market price (P), which for a 
competitive firm equals both marginal revenue (MR) and average revenue (AR). At the 
 quantity Q1, marginal revenue MR1 exceeds marginal cost MC1, so raising production 
 increases profit. At the quantity Q2, marginal cost MC2 is above marginal revenue MR2, so 
reducing production increases profit. The profit-maximizing quantity QMAX is found where 
the horizontal line representing the price intersects the marginal-cost curve.
of the firm’s output is the same regardless of the quantity that the firm decides 
to produce. Keep in mind that, for a competitive firm, the price equals both the 
firm’s average revenue (AR) and its marginal revenue (MR). 
We can use Figure 1 to find the quantity of output that maximizes profit. Imag-
ine that the firm is producing at Q1. At this level of output, the marginal-revenue 
curve is above the marginal-cost curve, showing that marginal revenue is greater 
than marginal cost. This means that if the firm were to raise production by 1 unit, 
the additional revenue (MR1) would exceed the additional cost (MC1). Profit, 
which equals total revenue minus total cost, would increase. Hence, if marginal 
revenue is greater t
--- PAGE 302 ---
CHAPTER 14   FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
quantity produced reaches QMAX. This analysis yields three general rules for 
• If marginal revenue is greater than marginal cost, the firm should increase its 
• If marginal cost is greater than marginal revenue, the firm should decrease its 
• At the profit-maximizing level of output, marginal revenue and marginal 
These rules are the key to rational decision making by any profit-maximizing 
firm. They apply not only to competitive firms but, as we will see in the next 
chapter, to other types of firms as well.
We can now see how the competitive firm decides what quantity of its good 
to supply to the market. Because a competitive firm is a price taker, its marginal 
revenue equals the market price. For any given price, the competitive firm’s 
 profit-maximizing quantity of output is found by looking at the intersection of the 
price with the marginal-cost curve. In Figure 1, that quantity of output is QMAX.
Suppose that the price prevailing in this market rises, perhaps because of an 
increase in market demand. Figure 2 shows how a competitive firm responds to 
the price increase. When the price is P1, the firm produces quantity Q1, the quan-
tity that equates marginal cost to the price. When the price rises to P2, the firm 
finds that marginal revenue is now higher than marginal cost at the previous level 
of output, so the firm inc
--- PAGE 303 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
Here we need to distinguish between a temporary shutdown of a firm and 
the permanent exit of a firm from the market. A shutdown refers to a short-run 
 decision not to produce anything during a specific period of time because of cur-
rent market conditions. Exit refers to a long-run decision to leave the market. The 
short-run and long-run decisions differ because most firms cannot avoid their 
fixed costs in the short run but can do so in the long run. That is, a firm that shuts 
down temporarily still has to pay its fixed costs, whereas a firm that exits the mar-
ket does not have to pay any costs at all, fixed or variable.
For example, consider the production decision that a farmer faces. The cost of 
the land is one of the farmer’s fixed costs. If the farmer decides not to produce any 
crops one season, the land lies fallow, and he cannot recover this cost. When making 
the short-run decision of whether to shut down for a season, the fixed cost of land is 
said to be a sunk cost. By contrast, if the farmer decides to leave farming altogether, 
he can sell the land. When making the long-run decision of whether to exit the mar-
ket, the cost of land is not sunk. (We return to the issue of sunk costs shortly.)
Now let’s consider what determines a firm’s shutdown decision. If the firm 
shuts down, it loses all revenue fro
--- PAGE 304 ---
CHAPTER 14   FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
competitive firm’s supply 
curve is its marginal-cost 
variable cost (AVC). If the 
price falls below average 
variable cost, the firm is 
1. In the short run, the firm 
14-2d Spilt Milk and Other Sunk Costs
Sometime in your life you may have been told, “Don’t cry over spilt milk,” or 
“Let bygones be bygones.” These adages hold a deep truth about rational decision 
making. Economists say that a cost is a sunk cost when it has already been com-
mitted and cannot be recovered. Because nothing can be done about sunk costs, 
you should ignore them when making decisions about various aspects of life, 
 including business strategy.
Our analysis of the firm’s shutdown decision is one example of the irrelevance 
of sunk costs. We assume that the firm cannot recover its fixed costs by tempo-
rarily stopping production. That is, regardless of the quantity of output supplied 
(even if it is zero), the firm still has to pay its fixed costs. As a result, the fixed 
costs are sunk in the short run, and the firm should ignore them when decid-
ing how much to produce. The firm’s short-run supply curve is the part of the 
 marginal-cost curve that lies above average variable cost, and the size of the fixed 
cost does not matter for this supply decision.
The irrelevance of sunk costs is also important when making personal deci-
sions. Imagine, for insta
--- PAGE 305 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
a restaurant’s costs—the rent, kitchen equipment, tables, plates, silverware, and 
so on—are fixed. Shutting down during lunch would not reduce these costs. In 
other words, these costs are sunk in the short run. When the owner is deciding 
whether to serve lunch, only the variable costs—the price of the additional food 
and the wages of the extra staff—are relevant. The owner shuts down the restau-
rant at lunchtime only if the revenue from the few lunchtime customers would fail 
to cover the restaurant’s variable costs.
An operator of a miniature-golf course in a summer resort community faces 
a similar decision. Because revenue varies substantially from season to season, 
the firm must decide when to open and when to close. Once again, the fixed 
costs—the costs of buying the land and building the course—are irrelevant in 
making this short-run decision. The miniature-golf course should be open for 
business only during those times of year when its revenue exceeds its variable 
14-2e The Firm’s Long-Run Decision to Exit or Enter a Market
A firm’s long-run decision to exit a market is similar to its shutdown decision. If 
the firm exits, it will again lose all revenue from the sale of its product, but now 
it will save not only its variable costs of production but also its fixed costs. Thus, 
the firm exits the market if
--- PAGE 306 ---
CHAPTER 14   FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
curve is its marginal-cost 
price falls below average 
total cost, the firm is better 
1. In the long run, the firm 
The firm exits if total revenue is less than total cost. By dividing both sides of this 
inequality by quantity Q, we can write it as 
We can simplify this further by noting that TR/Q is average revenue, which 
equals the price P, and that TC/Q is average total cost, ATC. Therefore, the firm’s 
That is, a firm chooses to exit if the price of its good is less than the average total 
A parallel analysis applies to an entrepreneur who is considering starting 
a firm. He will enter the market if starting the firm would be profitable, which 
occurs if the price of the good exceeds the average total cost of production. The 
The rule for entry is exactly the opposite of the rule for exit. 
We can now describe a competitive firm’s long-run profit-maximizing strat-
egy. If the firm produces anything, it chooses the quantity at which marginal cost 
equals the price of the good. Yet if the price is less than the average total cost at 
that quantity, the firm chooses to exit (or not enter) the market. These results are 
illustrated in Figure 4. The competitive firm’s long-run supply curve is the portion of its 
marginal-cost curve that lies above average total cost. 
14-2f Measuring Profit in Our Graph for the Competitive Firm
As we 
--- PAGE 307 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
The area of the shaded box between price and average total cost represents the firm’s 
profit. The height of this box is price minus average total cost (P 2 ATC), and the 
width of the box is the quantity of output (Q). In panel (a), price is above average total 
cost, so the firm has positive profit. In panel (b), price is less than average total cost, 
so the firm incurs a loss.
Profit as the Area between 
(profit-maximizing quantity)
(loss-minimizing quantity)
We can rewrite this definition by multiplying and dividing the right side by Q:
Profit 5 (TR/Q 2 TC/Q) 3 Q.
Note that TR/Q is average revenue, which is the price, P, and TC/Q is average 
total cost, ATC. Therefore,
This way of expressing the firm’s profit allows us to measure profit in our graphs. 
Panel (a) of Figure 5 shows a firm earning positive profit. As we have already 
discussed, the firm maximizes profit by producing the quantity at which price 
equals marginal cost. Now look at the shaded rectangle. The height of the rectan-
gle is P 2 ATC, the difference between price and average total cost. The width of 
the rectangle is Q, the quantity produced. Therefore, the area of the rectangle is 
(P 2 ATC) 3 Q, which is the firm’s profit. 
Similarly, panel (b) of this figure shows a firm with losses (negative profit). In 
this case, maximizing profit means minim
--- PAGE 308 ---
CHAPTER 14   FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
14-3 The Supply Curve in a Competitive Market
Now that we have examined the supply decision of a single firm, we can discuss 
the supply curve for a market. There are two cases to consider. First, we examine 
a market with a fixed number of firms. Second, we examine a market in which 
the number of firms can change as old firms exit the market and new firms enter. 
Both cases are important, for each applies to a specific time horizon. Over short 
periods of time, it is often difficult for firms to enter and exit, so the assumption of 
a fixed number of firms is appropriate. But over long periods of time, the number 
of firms can adjust to changing market conditions.
14-3a The Short Run: Market Supply with a Fixed Number of Firms
Consider a market with 1,000 identical firms. For any given price, each firm sup-
plies a quantity of output so that its marginal cost equals the price, as shown in 
panel (a) of Figure 6. That is, as long as price is above average variable cost, each 
firm’s marginal-cost curve is its supply curve. The quantity of output supplied to 
the market equals the sum of the quantities supplied by each of the 1,000 individ-
ual firms. Thus, to derive the market supply curve, we add the quantity supplied 
by each firm in the market. As panel (b) of Figure 6 shows, because the firms are 
identical, the quantity supplied t
--- PAGE 309 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
and access to the same markets to buy the inputs for production. Therefore, all 
current and potential firms have the same cost curves.
Decisions about entry and exit in a market of this type depend on the incen-
tives facing the owners of existing firms and the entrepreneurs who could start 
new firms. If firms already in the market are profitable, then new firms will have 
an incentive to enter the market. This entry will expand the number of firms, 
 increase the quantity of the good supplied, and drive down prices and profits. 
Conversely, if firms in the market are making losses, then some existing firms will 
exit the market. Their exit will reduce the number of firms, decrease the quantity 
of the good supplied, and drive up prices and profits. At the end of this process of 
entry and exit, firms that remain in the market must be making zero economic profit.
Recall that we can write a firm’s profit as
This equation shows that an operating firm has zero profit if and only if the 
price of the good equals the average total cost of producing that good. If price is 
above average total cost, profit is positive, which encourages new firms to enter. 
If price is less than average total cost, profit is negative, which encourages some 
firms to exit. The process of entry and exit ends only when price and average total cost 
--- PAGE 310 ---
CHAPTER 14   FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
To understand the zero-profit condition more fully, recall that profit equals 
total revenue minus total cost and that total cost includes all the opportunity costs 
of the firm. In particular, total cost includes the time and money that the firm 
owners devote to the business. In the zero-profit equilibrium, the firm’s revenue 
must compensate the owners for these opportunity costs.
Consider an example. Suppose that, to start his farm, a farmer had to invest 
$1 million, which otherwise he could have deposited in a bank and earned $50,000 
a year in interest. In addition, he had to give up another job that would have paid 
him $30,000 a year. Then the farmer’s opportunity cost of farming includes both 
the interest he could have earned and the forgone wages—a total of $80,000. Even 
if his profit is driven to zero, his revenue from farming compensates him for these 
Keep in mind that accountants and economists measure costs differently. As 
we discussed in the previous chapter, accountants keep track of explicit costs but 
not implicit costs. That is, they measure costs that require an outflow of money 
from the firm, but they do not include the opportunity costs of production that do 
not involve an outflow of money. As a result, in the zero-profit equilibrium, eco-
nomic profit is zero, but accounting profit is positive. Our farmer’s
--- PAGE 311 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
Suppose the market for milk begins in a long-run equilibrium. Firms are earn-
ing zero profit, so price equals the minimum of average total cost. Panel (a) of 
 Figure 8 shows this situation. The long-run equilibrium is point A, the quantity 
sold in the market is Q1, and the price is P1. 
Now suppose scientists discover that milk has miraculous health benefits. 
As a result, the quantity of milk demanded at every price increases, and the 
demand curve for milk shifts outward from D1 to D2, as in panel (b). The short-
run equilibrium moves from point A to point B; as a result, the quantity rises 
from Q1 to Q2, and the price rises from P1 to P2. All of the existing firms respond 
to the higher price by raising the amount they produce. Because each firm’s 
supply curve reflects its marginal-cost curve, how much each firm increases 
production is determined by the marginal-cost curve. In the new short-run 
equilibrium, the price of milk exceeds average total cost, so the firms are mak-
Over time, the profit generated in this market encourages new firms to enter. 
Some farmers may switch to producing milk instead of other farm products, for 
example. As the number of firms grows, the quantity supplied at every price in-
creases, the short-run supply curve shifts to the right from S1 to S2, as in panel (c), 
and this shift cau
--- PAGE 312 ---
CHAPTER 14   FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
The market starts in a long-run equilibrium, shown as point A in panel (a). In this equilibrium, 
each firm makes zero profit, and the price equals the minimum average total cost. Panel (b) 
shows what happens in the short run when demand rises from D1 to D2. The equilibrium goes 
from point A to point B, price rises from P1 to P2, and the quantity sold in the market rises from 
Q1 to Q2. Because price now exceeds average total cost, each firm now makes a profit, which over 
time encourages new firms to enter the market. This entry shifts the short-run supply curve to the 
right from S1 to S2, as shown in panel (c). In the new long-run equilibrium, point C, price has re-
turned to P1 but the quantity sold has increased to Q3. Profits are again zero, and price is back to 
the minimum of average total cost, but the market has more firms to satisfy the greater demand.
entry, supply increases and 
--- PAGE 313 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
1. A perfectly competitive firm
a. chooses its price to maximize profits.
b. sets its price to undercut other firms selling similar 
c. takes its price as given by market conditions.
d. picks the price that yields the largest market share.
2. A competitive firm maximizes profit by choosing the 
a. average total cost is at its minimum.
b. marginal cost equals the price.
c. average total cost equals the price.
d. marginal cost equals average total cost. 
the price must rise to make entry profitable for them. Thus, the long-run market 
supply curve for painting services slopes upward even with free entry into the 
Notice that if firms have different costs, some firms earn profit even in the 
long run. In this case, the price in the market reflects the average total cost of the 
marginal firm—the firm that would exit the market if the price were any lower. 
This firm earns zero profit, but firms with lower costs earn positive profit. Entry 
does not eliminate this profit because would-be entrants have higher costs than 
firms already in the market. Higher-cost firms will enter only if the price rises, 
making the market profitable for them.
Thus, for these two reasons, a higher price may be necessary to induce a larger 
quantity supplied, in which case the long-run supply curve is upward-sloping 
rather than horizontal. Noneth
--- PAGE 314 ---
CHAPTER 14   FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
3. A competitive firm’s short-run supply curve is its 
________ cost curve above its ________ cost curve.
a. average total, marginal
b. average variable, marginal
c. marginal, average total
d. marginal, average variable
4. If a profit-maximizing, competitive firm is producing 
a quantity at which marginal cost is between average 
variable cost and average total cost, it will
a. keep producing in the short run but exit the  market 
b. shut down in the short run but return to production 
c. shut down in the short run and exit the market in 
d. keep producing both in the short run and in the 
5. In the long-run equilibrium of a competitive  market 
with identical firms, what are the relationships 
among price P, marginal cost MC, and average total 
6. Pretzel stands in New York City are a perfectly 
 competitive industry in long-run equilibrium. One day, 
the city starts imposing a $100 per month tax on 
each stand. How does this policy affect the number of 
pretzels consumed in the short run and the long run?
a. down in the short run, no change in the long run
b. up in the short run, no change in the long run
c. no change in the short run, down in the long run
d. no change in the short run, up in the long run
• Because a competitive firm is a price taker, its revenue 
is proportional to the amount of output it produces. 
The price of the 
--- PAGE 315 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
6. Does a competitive firm’s price equal its marginal cost 
in the short run, in the long run, or both? Explain.
7. Does a competitive firm’s price equal the minimum of 
its average total cost in the short run, in the long run, 
8. Are market supply curves typically more elastic in the 
short run or in the long run? Explain.
1. Many small boats are made of fiberglass and a resin 
 derived from crude oil. Suppose that the price of 
a. Using diagrams, show what happens to the cost 
curves of an individual boat-making firm and to 
b. What happens to the profits of boat makers in the 
short run? What happens to the number of boat 
2. Bob’s lawn-mowing service is a profit-maximizing, 
competitive firm. Bob mows lawns for $27 each. His 
total cost each day is $280, of which $30 is a fixed cost. 
He mows 10 lawns a day. What can you say about 
Bob’s short-run decision regarding shutdown and his 
long-run decision regarding exit?
3. Consider total cost and total revenue given in the fol-
a. Calculate profit for each quantity. How much 
should the firm produce to maximize profit?
b. Calculate marginal revenue and marginal cost 
for each quantity. Graph them. (Hint: Put the 
points between whole numbers. For example, the 
 marginal cost between 2 and 3 should be graphed 
at 2½.) At what quantity do these curves cross? 
How does this
--- PAGE 316 ---
CHAPTER 14   FIRMS IN COMPETITIVE MARKETS
8. The market for fertilizer is perfectly competitive. 
Firms in the market are producing output but are cur-
rently incurring economic losses. 
a. How does the price of fertilizer compare to the av-
erage total cost, the average variable cost, and the 
marginal cost of producing fertilizer? 
b. Draw two graphs, side by side, illustrating the 
present situation for the typical firm and for the 
c. Assuming there is no change in either demand or 
the firms’ cost curves, explain what will happen 
in the long run to the price of fertilizer, marginal 
cost, average total cost, the quantity supplied by 
each firm, and the total quantity supplied to the 
9. The market for apple pies in the city of Ectenia is com-
petitive and has the following demand schedule:
Each producer in the market has fixed costs of $9 and 
the following marginal cost:
a. Compute each producer’s total cost and average 
total cost for 1 to 6 pies.
b. The price of a pie is now $11. How many pies are 
sold? How many pies does each producer make? 
How many producers are there? How much profit 
c. Is the situation described in part (b) a long-run 
equilibrium? Why or why not?
d. Suppose that in the long run there is free entry 
and exit. How much profit does each producer 
earn in the long-run equilibrium? What is the 
market price? How many pies does each producer 
make? H
--- PAGE 317 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
 minimum?  What is marginal cost and average 
total cost at that quantity?
c. Give the equation for each firm’s supply curve.
d. Give the equation for the market supply curve for 
the short run in which the number of firms is fixed.
e. What is the equilibrium price and quantity for this 
f. In this equilibrium, how much does each firm 
 produce? Calculate each firm’s profit or loss. Is 
there incentive for firms to enter or exit?
g. In the long run with free entry and exit, what is 
the equilibrium price and quantity in this market?
h. In this long-run equilibrium, how much does 
each firm produce?  How many firms are in the 
--- PAGE 318 ---
f you own a personal computer, it probably uses some version of Windows, 
the operating system sold by the Microsoft Corporation. When Microsoft first 
 designed Windows many years ago, it applied for and received a copyright 
from the government. The copyright gives Microsoft the exclusive right to make 
and sell copies of the Windows operating system. If a person wants to buy a copy 
of Windows, she has little choice but to give Microsoft the approximately $100 
that the firm has decided to charge for its product. Microsoft is said to have a 
 monopoly in the market for Windows.
Microsoft’s business decisions are not well described by the model of firm 
behavior we developed in the previous chapter. In that chapter, 
--- PAGE 319 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
we analyzed competitive markets, in which many firms offer essentially identical 
products, so each firm has little influence over the price it receives. By contrast, 
a monopoly such as Microsoft has no close competitors and, therefore, has the 
power to influence the market price of its product. Whereas a competitive firm is 
a price taker, a monopoly firm is a price maker.
In this chapter, we examine the implications of this market power. We will see 
that market power alters the relationship between a firm’s costs and the price at 
which it sells its product. A competitive firm takes the price of its output as given 
by the market and then chooses the quantity it will supply so that price equals 
marginal cost. By contrast, a monopoly charges a price that exceeds marginal cost. 
Sure enough, we observe this practice in the case of Microsoft’s Windows. The 
marginal cost of Windows—the extra cost that Microsoft incurs by downloading 
one more copy of the program onto a CD—is only a few dollars. The market price 
of Windows is many times its marginal cost.
It is not surprising that monopolies charge high prices for their products. Cus-
tomers of monopolies might seem to have little choice but to pay whatever the 
monopoly charges. But if so, why does a copy of Windows not cost $1,000? Or 
$10,000? The reason is that if M
--- PAGE 320 ---
• Monopoly resources: A key resource required for production is owned 
• Government regulation: The government gives a single firm the 
 exclusive right to produce some good or service.
• The production process: A single firm can produce output at a lower 
cost than can a larger number of firms.
Let’s briefly discuss each of these.
The simplest way for a monopoly to arise is for a single firm to own a key 
resource. For example, consider the market for water in a small town. If 
dozens of town residents have working wells, the model of competitive 
markets discussed in the preceding chapter describes the behavior of sell-
ers. Competition among suppliers drives the price of a gallon of water to 
equal the marginal cost of pumping an extra gallon. But if there is only one 
well in town and it is impossible to get water from anywhere else, then the 
owner of the well has a monopoly on water. Not surprisingly, the monopolist has 
much greater market power than any single firm in a competitive market. In the 
case of a necessity like water, the monopolist can command quite a high price, 
even if the marginal cost of pumping an extra gallon is low.
A classic example of market power arising from the ownership of a key 
 resource is DeBeers, the South African diamond company. Founded in 1888 by 
Cecil Rhodes, an English businessman (and benefactor of the Rhodes scholar-
ship), DeBeers
--- PAGE 321 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
competition. But by allowing these monopoly producers to charge higher prices 
and earn higher profits, the laws also encourage some desirable behavior. Drug 
companies are allowed to be monopolists in the drugs they discover to encour-
age research. Authors are allowed to be monopolists in the sale of their books to 
 encourage them to write more and better books.
Thus, the laws governing patents and copyrights have both benefits and costs. 
The benefits of the patent and copyright laws are the increased incentives for cre-
ative activity. These benefits are offset, to some extent, by the costs of monopoly 
pricing, which we examine later in this chapter. 
An industry is a natural monopoly when a single firm can supply a good or ser-
vice to an entire market at a lower cost than could two or more firms. A natural 
monopoly arises when there are economies of scale over the relevant range of out-
put. Figure 1 shows the average total costs of a firm with economies of scale. In 
this case, a single firm can produce any amount of output at the lowest cost. That 
is, for any given amount of output, a larger number of firms leads to less output 
per firm and higher average total cost.
An example of a natural monopoly is the distribution of water. To provide 
water to residents of a town, a firm must build a network of pipes thr
--- PAGE 322 ---
When a firm is a natural monopoly, it is less concerned about new entrants 
eroding its monopoly power. Normally, a firm has trouble maintaining a monop-
oly position without ownership of a key resource or protection from the govern-
ment. The monopolist’s profit attracts entrants into the market, and these entrants 
make the market more competitive. By contrast, entering a market in which 
 another firm has a natural monopoly is unattractive. Would-be entrants know 
that they cannot achieve the same low costs that the monopolist enjoys because, 
after entry, each firm would have a smaller piece of the market. 
In some cases, the size of the market is one determinant of whether an industry 
is a natural monopoly. Again, consider a bridge across a river. When the popula-
tion is small, the bridge may be a natural monopoly. A single bridge can satisfy 
the entire demand for trips across the river at the lowest cost. Yet as the popula-
tion grows and the bridge becomes congested, satisfying the entire demand may 
require two or more bridges across the same river. Thus, as a market expands, a 
natural monopoly can evolve into a more competitive market.
What are the three reasons that a market might have a monopoly? • Give 
two examples of monopolies and explain the reason for each.
15-2  How Monopolies Make Production  
Now that we know how monopolies arise, we can consider how a m
--- PAGE 323 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
charge a high price and sell a large quantity at that high price. The market demand 
curve makes that outcome impossible. In particular, the market demand curve 
describes the combinations of price and quantity that are available to a monopoly 
firm. By adjusting the quantity produced (or equivalently, the price charged), the 
monopolist can choose any point on the demand curve, but it cannot choose a 
point off the demand curve. 
What price and quantity of output will the monopolist choose? As with com-
petitive firms, we assume that the monopolist’s goal is to maximize profit. Because 
the firm’s profit is total revenue minus total costs, our next task in  explaining 
 monopoly behavior is to examine a monopolist’s revenue.
15-2b A Monopoly’s Revenue
Consider a town with a single producer of water. Table 1 shows how the mono-
poly’s revenue might depend on the amount of water produced. 
Columns (1) and (2) show the monopolist’s demand schedule. If the 
monopolist produces 1 gallon of water, it can sell that gallon for $10. If it produces 
2 gallons, it must lower the price to $9 to sell both gallons. If it produces 3 gallons, 
it must lower the price to $8. And so on. If you graphed these two columns of 
numbers, you would get a typical downward-sloping demand curve.
Column (3) of the table presents the monopolist’s tota
--- PAGE 324 ---
Column (5) of Table 1 computes the firm’s marginal revenue, the amount of rev-
enue that the firm receives for each additional unit of output. We compute mar-
ginal revenue by taking the change in total revenue when output increases by 
1 unit. For example, when the firm is producing 3 gallons of water, it receives  total 
revenue of $24. Raising production to 4 gallons increases total revenue to $28. 
Thus, marginal revenue from the sale of the fourth gallon is $28 minus $24, or $4.
Table 1 shows a result that is important for understanding monopoly behavior: 
A monopolist’s marginal revenue is less than the price of its good. For example, if the 
firm raises production of water from 3 to 4 gallons, it increases total revenue by 
only $4, even though it sells each gallon for $7. For a monopoly, marginal revenue 
is lower than price because a monopoly faces a downward-sloping demand curve. 
To increase the amount sold, a monopoly firm must lower the price it charges to 
all customers. Hence, to sell the fourth gallon of water, the monopolist must earn 
$1 less revenue for each of the first 3 gallons. This $3 loss accounts for the differ-
ence between the price of the fourth gallon ($7) and the marginal revenue of that 
Marginal revenue for monopolies is very different from marginal revenue for 
competitive firms. When a monopoly increases the amount it sells, this action has 
t
--- PAGE 325 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
Because a competitive firm can sell all it wants at the market price, there is no 
price effect. When it increases production by 1 unit, it receives the market price for 
that unit, and it does not receive any less for the units it was already selling. That 
is, because the competitive firm is a price taker, its marginal revenue equals the 
price of its good. By contrast, when a monopoly increases production by 1 unit, it 
must reduce the price it charges for every unit it sells, and this cut in price reduces 
revenue on the units it was already selling. As a result, a monopoly’s marginal 
revenue is less than its price. 
Figure 3 graphs the demand curve and the marginal-revenue curve for a 
monopoly firm. (Because the firm’s price equals its average revenue, the demand 
curve is also the average-revenue curve.) These two curves always start at the 
same point on the vertical axis because the marginal revenue of the first unit sold 
equals the price of the good. But for the reason we just discussed, the monopo-
list’s marginal revenue on all units after the first is less than the price of the good. 
Thus, a monopoly’s marginal-revenue curve lies below its demand curve. 
You can see in Figure 3 (as well as in Table 1) that marginal revenue can even 
become negative. Marginal revenue is negative when the price effect on reve
--- PAGE 326 ---
information we need to determine the level of output that a profit-maximizing 
Suppose, first, that the firm is producing at a low level of output, such as Q1. 
In this case, marginal cost is less than marginal revenue. If the firm increased pro-
duction by 1 unit, the additional revenue would exceed the additional costs, and 
profit would rise. Thus, when marginal cost is less than marginal revenue, the 
firm can increase profit by producing more units.
A similar argument applies at high levels of output, such as Q2. In this case, 
marginal cost is greater than marginal revenue. If the firm reduced production 
by 1 unit, the costs saved would exceed the revenue lost. Thus, if marginal cost is 
greater than marginal revenue, the firm can raise profit by reducing production.
In the end, the firm adjusts its level of production until the quantity reaches QMAX, at 
which marginal revenue equals marginal cost. Thus, the monopolist’s  profit-maximizing 
quantity of output is determined by the intersection of the marginal- revenue curve and the 
marginal-cost curve. In Figure 4, this intersection occurs at point A.
You might recall from the previous chapter that competitive firms also choose 
the quantity of output at which marginal revenue equals marginal cost. In follow-
ing this rule for profit maximization, competitive firms and monopolies are alike. 
But there is also an importa
--- PAGE 327 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
How does the monopoly find the profit-maximizing price for its product? 
The demand curve answers this question because the demand curve relates the 
amount that customers are willing to pay to the quantity sold. Thus, after the 
monopoly firm chooses the quantity of output that equates marginal revenue and 
marginal cost, it uses the demand curve to find the highest price it can charge for 
that quantity. In Figure 4, the profit-maximizing price is found at point B.
We can now see a key difference between markets with competitive firms and 
markets with a monopoly firm: In competitive markets, price equals marginal cost. In 
monopolized markets, price exceeds marginal cost. As we will see in a moment, this 
finding is crucial to understanding the social cost of monopoly.
How much profit does a monopoly make? To see a monopoly firm’s profit in a 
graph, recall that profit equals total revenue (TR) minus total costs (TC):
Profit 5 (TR/Q 2 TC/Q) 3 Q.
TR/Q is average revenue, which equals the price, P, and TC/Q is average total 
This equation for profit (which also holds for competitive firms) allows us to mea-
sure the monopolist’s profit in our graph. 
Consider the shaded box in Figure 5. The height of the box (the segment BC) 
is price minus average total cost, P – ATC, which is the profit on the typical unit 
sold. The wi
--- PAGE 328 ---
MONOPOLY DRUGS VERSUS GENERIC DRUGS
According to our analysis, prices are determined differently in 
monopolized markets and competitive markets. A natural place to 
test this theory is the market for pharmaceutical drugs because this 
market takes on both market structures. When a firm discovers a new drug, pat-
ent laws give the firm a monopoly on the sale of that drug. But eventually, the 
firm’s patent runs out, and any company can make and sell the drug. At that time, 
the market switches from being monopolistic to being competitive.
What should happen to the price of a drug when the patent runs out? Figure 6 
shows the market for a typical drug. In this figure, the marginal cost of producing 
the drug is constant. (This is approximately true for many drugs.) During the life 
of the patent, the monopoly firm maximizes profit by producing the quantity at 
which marginal revenue equals marginal cost and charging a price well above mar-
ginal cost. But when the patent runs out, the profit from making the drug should 
encourage new firms to enter the market. As the market becomes more competi-
tive, the price should fall to equal marginal cost.
Experience is, in fact, consistent with our theory. When the patent on a drug 
 expires, other companies quickly enter and begin selling generic products that 
are chemically identical to the former monopolist’s brand-name product. Just
--- PAGE 329 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
brand name Prozac, and a generic version of the same medicine. Prozac sells for about 
three times the price of generic fluoxetine. This price differential can persist because 
some consumers are not convinced that the two pills are perfect substitutes. ●
Explain how a monopolist chooses the quantity of output to produce and 
When a patent gives a firm a monopoly 
over the sale of a drug, the firm charges 
the monopoly price, which is well above 
the marginal cost of making the drug. 
When the patent on a drug runs out, new 
firms enter the market, making it more 
competitive. As a result, the price falls 
from the monopoly price to marginal cost.
15-3 The Welfare Cost of Monopolies
Is monopoly a good way to organize a market? We have seen that a monopoly, 
in contrast to a competitive firm, charges a price above marginal cost. From the 
standpoint of consumers, this high price makes monopoly undesirable. At the 
same time, however, the monopoly is earning profit from charging this high price. 
From the standpoint of the owners of the firm, the high price makes monopoly 
very desirable. Is it possible that the benefits to the firm’s owners exceed the costs 
imposed on consumers, making monopoly desirable from the standpoint of soci-
We can answer this question using the tools of welfare economics. Recall from 
Chapter 7 th
--- PAGE 330 ---
We begin by considering what the monopoly firm would do if it were run by a 
benevolent social planner. The social planner cares not only about the profit 
earned by the firm’s owners but also about the benefits received by the firm’s 
consumers. The planner tries to maximize total surplus, which equals producer 
surplus (profit) plus consumer surplus. Keep in mind that total surplus equals the 
value of the good to consumers minus the costs of making the good incurred by 
Figure 7 analyzes how a benevolent social planner would choose the monop-
oly’s level of output. The demand curve reflects the value of the good to con-
sumers, as measured by their willingness to pay for it. The marginal-cost curve 
reflects the costs of the monopolist. Thus, the socially efficient quantity is found where 
the demand curve and the marginal-cost curve intersect. Below this quantity, the value 
of an extra unit to consumers exceeds the cost of providing it, so increasing out-
put would raise total surplus. Above this quantity, the cost of producing an extra 
unit exceeds the value of that unit to consumers, so decreasing output would raise 
total surplus. At the optimal quantity, the value of an extra unit to consumers 
exactly equals the marginal cost of production.
If the social planner were running the monopoly, the firm could achieve this 
efficient outcome by charging the price found at t
--- PAGE 331 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
choose. As we have seen, the monopolist chooses to produce and sell the quantity 
of output at which the marginal-revenue and marginal-cost curves intersect; the 
social planner would choose the quantity at which the demand and marginal-cost 
curves intersect. Figure 8 shows the comparison. The monopolist produces less than 
the socially efficient quantity of output. 
We can also view the inefficiency of monopoly in terms of the monopolist’s 
price. Because the market demand curve describes a negative relationship 
 between the price and quantity of the good, a quantity that is inefficiently low is 
equivalent to a price that is inefficiently high. When a monopolist charges a price 
above marginal cost, some potential consumers value the good at more than its 
marginal cost but less than the monopolist’s price. These consumers do not buy 
the good. Because the value these consumers place on the good is greater than the 
cost of providing it to them, this result is inefficient. Thus, monopoly pricing pre-
vents some mutually beneficial trades from taking place. 
The inefficiency of monopoly can be measured with a deadweight loss tri-
angle, as illustrated in Figure 8. Because the demand curve reflects the value to 
consumers and the marginal-cost curve reflects the costs to the monopoly pro-
ducer, the area of the deadweigh
--- PAGE 332 ---
15-3b The Monopoly’s Profit: A Social Cost?
It is tempting to decry monopolies for “profiteering” at the expense of the public. 
And indeed, a monopoly firm does earn a profit by virtue of its market power. 
According to the economic analysis of monopoly, however, the firm’s profit is not 
in itself necessarily a problem for society.
Welfare in a monopolized market, as in all markets, includes the welfare of 
both consumers and producers. Whenever a consumer pays an extra dollar to 
a producer because of a monopoly price, the consumer is worse off by a dollar 
and the producer is better off by the same amount. This transfer from the con-
sumers of the good to the owners of the monopoly does not affect the market’s 
total  surplus—the sum of consumer and producer surplus. In other words, the 
monopoly profit itself represents not a reduction in the size of the economic pie 
but merely a bigger slice for producers and a smaller slice for consumers.  Unless 
consumers are for some reason more deserving than producers—a normative 
judgment about equity that goes beyond the realm of economic efficiency—the 
monopoly profit is not a social problem.
The problem in a monopolized market arises because the firm produces and 
sells a quantity of output below the level that maximizes total surplus. The 
deadweight loss measures how much the economic pie shrinks as a result. This 
inefficie
--- PAGE 333 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
higher price to a customer, that customer would buy from another firm. For a firm 
to price discriminate, it must have some market power.
15-4a A Parable about Pricing
To understand why a monopolist would price discriminate, let’s consider an 
example. Imagine that you are the president of Readalot Publishing Company. 
Readalot’s best-selling author has just written a new novel. To keep things 
simple, let’s imagine that you pay the author a flat $2 million for the exclusive 
rights to publish the book. Let’s also assume that the cost of printing the book is 
zero (as it would be, for example, for an e-book). Readalot’s profit, therefore, 
is the revenue from selling the book minus the $2 million it has paid to the 
author. Given these assumptions, how would you, as Readalot’s president, 
Your first step is to estimate the demand for the book. Readalot’s marketing 
department tells you that the book will attract two types of readers. The book will 
appeal to the author’s 100,000 die-hard fans who are willing to pay as much as 
$30. In addition, it will appeal to about 400,000 less enthusiastic readers who will 
If Readalot charges a single price to all customers, what price maximizes 
profit? There are two natural prices to consider: $30 is the highest price Read-
alot can charge and still get the 100,000 die-hard fans, an
--- PAGE 334 ---
15-4b The Moral of the Story
Like any parable, the story of Readalot Publishing is stylized. Yet also like any 
parable, it teaches some general lessons. In this case, three lessons can be learned 
about price discrimination.
The first and most obvious lesson is that price discrimination is a rational 
strategy for a profit-maximizing monopolist. That is, by charging different prices 
to different customers, a monopolist can increase its profit. In essence, a price- 
discriminating monopolist charges each customer a price closer to her willingness 
to pay than is possible with a single price.
The second lesson is that price discrimination requires the ability to separate 
customers according to their willingness to pay. In our example, customers were 
separated geographically. But sometimes monopolists choose other differences, 
such as age or income, to distinguish among customers.
A corollary to this second lesson is that certain market forces can prevent firms 
from price discriminating. In particular, one such force is arbitrage, the process 
of buying a good in one market at a low price and selling it in another market 
at a higher price to profit from the price difference. In our example, if Australian 
bookstores could buy the book in the United States and resell it to Australian 
readers, the arbitrage would prevent Readalot from price discriminating, because 
no Austra
--- PAGE 335 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
place, no deadweight loss occurs, and the entire surplus derived from the market 
goes to the monopoly producer in the form of profit.
In reality, of course, price discrimination is not perfect. Customers do not walk 
into stores with signs displaying their willingness to pay. Instead, firms price dis-
criminate by dividing customers into groups: young versus old, weekday versus 
weekend shoppers, Americans versus Australians, and so on. Unlike those in our 
parable of Readalot Publishing, customers within each group differ in their will-
ingness to pay for the product, making perfect price discrimination impossible.
How does this imperfect price discrimination affect welfare? The analysis of 
these pricing schemes is complicated, and it turns out that there is no general 
answer to this question. Compared with the single-price monopoly outcome, 
imperfect price discrimination can raise, lower, or leave unchanged the total sur-
plus in a market. The only certain conclusion is that price discrimination raises 
the monopoly’s profit; otherwise, the firm would choose to charge all customers 
15-4d Examples of Price Discrimination
Firms in our economy use various business strategies aimed at charging different 
prices to different customers. Now that we understand the economics of price dis-
crimination, let’s consider some ex
--- PAGE 336 ---
of providing a seat for anyone else. Yet the differential pricing is easily 
 explained if movie theaters have some local monopoly power and if chil-
dren and senior citizens have a lower willingness to pay for a ticket. In this 
case, movie theaters raise their profit by price discriminating.
Airline Prices  Seats on airplanes are sold at many different prices. Most 
airlines charge a lower price for a round-trip ticket between two cities if the 
traveler stays over a Saturday night. At first, this seems odd. Why should it 
matter to the airline whether a passenger stays over a Saturday night? The 
reason is that this rule provides a way to separate business travelers and 
leisure travelers. A passenger on a business trip has a high willingness to 
pay and, most likely, does not want to stay over a Saturday night. By con-
trast, a passenger traveling for personal reasons has a lower willingness to 
pay and is more likely to be willing to stay over a Saturday night. Thus, the 
airlines can successfully price discriminate by charging a lower price for 
passengers who stay over a Saturday night.
Discount Coupons  Many companies offer discount coupons to the public in 
newspapers, magazines, or online. A buyer simply has to clip the coupon to get 
$0.50 off her next purchase. Why do companies offer these coupons? Why don’t 
they just cut the price of the product by $0.50?
The answ
--- PAGE 337 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
Colleges and universities are  
increasingly charging different prices 
to different students, which makes 
data on the cost of education harder 
College Costs Aren’t Soaring
onventional wisdom suggests that U.S. 
colleges and universities have become 
sharply more expensive in recent years.
“When kids do graduate, the most daunt-
ing challenge can be the cost of college,” 
President Barack Obama said in his 2012 
State of the Union address. “We can’t just 
keep subsidizing skyrocketing tuition; we’ll 
At first, the view that the cost of col-
lege is rising appears to have data on its 
side. Published tuition prices and fees at 
colleges have risen three times faster than 
the rate of Consumer Price Index inflation 
since 1978, according to the Bureau of Labor 
Real tuition and fees have increased, to 
be sure, but hardly as significantly as the 
 media often report or the data suggest at face 
value. The inflation-adjusted net price of col-
lege has risen only modestly over the last two 
decades, according to data from the College 
Board’s Annual Survey of Colleges.
What has happened is a shift toward price 
discrimination—offering multiple prices for 
the same product. Universities have offset 
the increase in sticker price for most families 
through an expansion of grant-based financial 
aid and scholarships. That has c
--- PAGE 338 ---
large soft-drink companies would make the U.S. soft-drink market substan-
tially less competitive and, as a result, would reduce the economic well-being 
of the country as a whole. If so, the Department of Justice would challenge the 
merger in court, and if the judge agreed, the two companies would not be al-
lowed to merge. It is precisely this kind of challenge that prevented  software 
giant Microsoft from buying Intuit in 1994. Similarly, in 2011, the government 
blocked the phone giant AT&T from buying its competitor T-Mobile.
The government derives this power over private industry from the an-
titrust laws, a collection of statutes aimed at curbing monopoly power. 
The first and most important of these laws was the Sherman Antitrust Act, 
which Congress passed in 1890 to reduce the market power of the large and 
powerful “trusts” that were viewed as dominating the economy at the time. 
The Clayton Antitrust Act, passed in 1914, strengthened the government’s 
powers and authorized private lawsuits. As the U.S. Supreme Court once put 
it, the antitrust laws are “a comprehensive charter of economic liberty aimed 
at  preserving free and unfettered competition as the rule of trade.”
The antitrust laws give the government various ways to promote compe-
tition. They allow the government to prevent mergers, such as the merger 
between AT&T and T-Mobile. At times, they allow the
--- PAGE 339 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
declining average total cost. As we first discussed in Chapter 13, when average 
total cost is declining, marginal cost is less than average total cost. This situation 
is illustrated in Figure 10, which shows a firm with a large fixed cost and then 
constant marginal cost thereafter. If regulators were to set price equal to marginal 
cost, that price would be less than the firm’s average total cost and the firm would 
lose money. Instead of charging such a low price, the monopoly firm would just 
Regulators can respond to this problem in various ways, none of which is per-
fect. One way is to subsidize the monopolist. In essence, the government picks up 
the losses inherent in marginal-cost pricing. Yet to pay for the subsidy, the gov-
ernment needs to raise money through taxation, which involves its own dead-
weight losses. Alternatively, the regulators can allow the monopolist to charge a 
price higher than marginal cost. If the regulated price equals average total cost, 
the monopolist earns exactly zero economic profit. Yet average-cost pricing leads 
to deadweight losses because the monopolist’s price no longer reflects the mar-
ginal cost of producing the good. In essence, average-cost pricing is like a tax on 
the good the monopolist is selling.
The second problem with marginal-cost pricing as a regulatory system (
--- PAGE 340 ---
such as telephone, water, and electric companies. In the United States, the gov-
ernment runs the Postal Service. The delivery of ordinary first-class mail is often 
thought to be a natural monopoly. 
Economists usually prefer private to public ownership of natural monopolies. 
The key issue is how the ownership of the firm affects the costs of production. 
Private owners have an incentive to minimize costs as long as they reap part of 
the benefit in the form of higher profit. If the firm’s managers are doing a bad job 
of keeping costs down, the firm’s owners will fire them. By contrast, if the govern-
ment bureaucrats who run a monopoly do a bad job, the losers are the customers 
and taxpayers, whose only recourse is the political system. The bureaucrats may 
become a special-interest group and attempt to block cost-reducing reforms. Put 
simply, as a way of ensuring that firms are well run, the voting booth is less reli-
able than the profit motive.
Each of the foregoing policies aimed at reducing the problem of monopoly has 
drawbacks. As a result, some economists argue that it is often best for the gov-
ernment not to try to remedy the inefficiencies of monopoly pricing. Here is the 
assessment of economist George Stigler, who won the Nobel Prize for his work in 
A famous theorem in economics states that a competitive enterprise economy 
will produce the largest possible 
--- PAGE 341 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
because their goods are not exactly the same as those offered by other firms. 
A Ford Taurus is not the same as a Toyota Camry. Ben and Jerry’s ice cream is 
not the same as Breyer’s. Each of these goods has a downward-sloping demand 
curve, which gives each producer some degree of monopoly power.
Yet firms with substantial monopoly power are rare. Few goods are truly 
unique. Most have substitutes that, even if not exactly the same, are similar. Ben 
and Jerry can raise the price of their ice cream a little without losing all their sales, 
but if they raise it a lot, sales will fall substantially as their customers switch to 
In the end, monopoly power is a matter of degree. It is true that many firms 
have some monopoly power. It is also true that their monopoly power is usually 
limited. In such a situation, we will not go far wrong assuming that firms operate 
in competitive markets, even if that is not precisely the case.
Competition versus Monopoly: 
Can earn economic profits 
Produces welfare-maximizing 
Can earn economic profits 
1. A firm is a natural monopoly if it exhibits the follow-
ing as its output increases:
a. decreasing marginal revenue.
b. increasing marginal cost.
c. decreasing average revenue.
d. decreasing average total cost.
2. For a profit-maximizing monopoly that charges the 
same price to all cons
--- PAGE 342 ---
3. If a monopoly’s fixed costs increase, its price will 
_____ and its profit will _____.
c. increase, stay the same
d. stay the same, decrease
4. Compared to the social optimum, a monopoly firm 
a. a quantity that is too low and a price that is  
b. a quantity that is too high and a price that is  
c. a quantity and a price that are both too high.
d. a quantity and a price that are both too low. 
5. The deadweight loss from monopoly arises because
a. the monopoly firm makes higher profits than a 
b. some potential consumers who forgo buying the 
good value it more than its marginal cost.
c. consumers who buy the good have to pay more 
than marginal cost, reducing their consumer 
d. the monopoly firm chooses a quantity that fails to 
equate price and average revenue.
6. When a monopolist switches from charging a single 
price to practicing perfect price discrimination, it 
• A monopoly is a firm that is the sole seller in its market. A 
monopoly arises when a single firm owns a key resource, 
when the government gives a firm the exclusive right to 
produce a good, or when a single firm can supply the 
 entire market at a lower cost than many firms could.
• Because a monopoly is the sole producer in its mar-
ket, it faces a downward-sloping demand curve for 
its product. When a monopoly increases production 
by 1 unit, it causes the price of its good to fall, which 
reduces the 
--- PAGE 343 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
1. A publisher faces the following demand schedule for 
the next novel from one of its popular authors:
The author is paid $2 million to write the book, and 
the marginal cost of publishing the book is a constant 
a. Compute total revenue, total cost, and profit  
at each quantity. What quantity would a  
profit-maximizing publisher choose? What  
b. Compute marginal revenue. (Recall that  
MR 5 ΔTR/ΔQ.) How does marginal revenue 
compare to the price? Explain.
c. Graph the marginal-revenue, marginal-cost, and 
demand curves. At what quantity do the margin-
al-revenue and marginal-cost curves cross? What 
d. In your graph, shade in the deadweight loss.  
Explain in words what this means.
e. If the author were paid $3 million instead of  
$2 million to write the book, how would this  
affect the publisher’s decision regarding what 
f. Suppose the publisher was not profit-maximizing 
but was concerned with maximizing economic  
efficiency. What price would it charge for the 
book? How much profit would it make at this 
kets, which have the same constant marginal cost. 
a. Using a diagram of the market for groceries,  
show the consumer surplus, producer surplus, 
b. Now suppose that the independent supermarkets 
combine into one chain. Using a new diagram, 
show the new consumer surplus, producer  
surplus, and total surplus
--- PAGE 344 ---
3. Johnny Rockabilly has just finished recording his latest 
CD. His record company’s marketing department  
determines that the demand for the CD is as follows:
The company can produce the CD with no fixed cost 
and a variable cost of $5 per CD.
a. Find total revenue for quantity equal to 10,000, 
20,000, and so on. What is the marginal revenue 
for each 10,000 increase in the quantity sold?
b. What quantity of CDs would maximize profit? 
What would the price be? What would the  
c. If you were Johnny’s agent, what recording  
fee would you advise Johnny to demand from  
4. A company is considering building a bridge across a 
river. The bridge would cost $2 million to build and 
nothing to maintain. The following table shows the 
company’s anticipated demand over the lifetime  
a. If the company were to build the bridge, what 
would be its profit-maximizing price? Would that 
be the efficient level of output? Why or why not?
b. If the company is interested in maximizing profit, 
should it build the bridge? What would be its 
c. If the government were to build the bridge, what 
d. Should the government build the bridge? Explain.
5. Consider the relationship between monopoly pricing 
and price elasticity of demand.
a. Explain why a monopolist will never produce a 
quantity at which the demand curve is inelastic. 
(Hint: If demand is inelastic and the firm raises 
its price, what
--- PAGE 345 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
7. The residents of the town Ectenia all love economics, 
and the mayor proposes building an economics  
museum. The museum has a fixed cost of $2,400,000 
and no variable costs. There are 100,000 town  
residents, and each has the same demand for  
museum visits: QD 5 10 2 P, where P is the price of 
a. Graph the museum’s average-total-cost curve 
and its marginal-cost curve. What kind of market 
would describe the museum?
b. The mayor proposes financing the museum with 
a lump-sum tax of $24 and then opening the 
museum to the public for free. How many times 
would each person visit? Calculate the benefit 
each person would get from the museum, mea-
sured as consumer surplus minus the new tax.
c. The mayor’s anti-tax opponent says the museum 
should finance itself by charging an admission fee. 
What is the lowest price the museum can charge 
without incurring losses? (Hint: Find the number 
of visits and museum profits for prices of $2, $3, 
d. For the break-even price you found in part (c),  
calculate each resident’s consumer surplus.  
Compared with the mayor’s plan, who is better 
off with this admission fee, and who is worse off? 
e. What real-world considerations absent in the 
problem above might provide reasons to favor an 
8. Henry Potter owns the only well in town that pro-
duces clean drinking water. He faces 
--- PAGE 346 ---
where Q indicates the number of copies sold and P is 
the price in Ectenian dollars.
a. Find the price and quantity that maximize the 
b. Find the price and quantity that would maximize 
c. Calculate the deadweight loss from monopoly.
d. Suppose, in addition to the costs above, the  
director of the film has to be paid. The company is 
i. a flat fee of 2,000 Ectenian dollars. 
ii. 50 percent of the profits.
iii. 150 Ectenian dollars per unit sold. 
iv. 50 percent of the revenue.
For each option, calculate the profit-maximizing 
price and quantity. Which, if any, of these compensa-
tion schemes would alter the deadweight loss from 
11. Larry, Curly, and Moe run the only saloon in town. 
Larry wants to sell as many drinks as possible without 
losing money. Curly wants the saloon to bring in as 
much revenue as possible. Moe wants to make the 
largest possible profits. Using a single diagram of  
the saloon’s demand curve and its cost curves, show 
the price and quantity combinations favored by each 
of the three partners. Explain. (Hint: Only one of these 
partners will want to set marginal revenue equal to 
12. Many schemes for price discrimination involve some 
cost. For example, discount coupons take up the time 
and resources of both the buyer and the seller. This 
question considers the implications of costly price 
discrimination. To keep things simple, let’s assume 
that o
--- PAGE 347 ---

--- PAGE 348 ---
ou walk into a bookstore to buy a book to read during your next vacation. 
On the store’s shelves you find a Patricia Cornwell mystery, a Stephen King 
thriller, a Nathaniel Philbrick history, a Suzanne Collins dystopian survival 
romance, and many other choices. When you pick out a book and buy it, what 
kind of market are you participating in? 
On the one hand, the market for books seems competitive. As you look over 
the shelves at your bookstore, you find many authors and many publishers  vying 
for your attention. A buyer in this market has thousands of competing products 
from which to choose. And because anyone can enter the industry by writing 
and  publishing a book, the book business is not very profitable. For every 
highly paid novelist, there are hundreds of struggling ones.
--- PAGE 349 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
On the other hand, the market for books seems monopolistic. Because each 
book is unique, publishers have some latitude in choosing what price to charge. 
The sellers in this market are price makers rather than price takers. And indeed, 
the price of books greatly exceeds marginal cost. The price of a typical hardcover 
novel, for instance, is about $25, whereas the cost of printing one additional copy 
of the novel is less than $5.
The market for novels fits neither the competitive nor the monopoly model. 
 Instead, it is best described by the model of monopolistic competition, the subject 
of this chapter. The term “monopolistic competition” might at first seem to be an 
oxymoron, like “jumbo shrimp.” But as we will see, monopolistically competitive 
industries are monopolistic in some ways and competitive in others. The model 
describes not only the publishing industry but also the market for many other goods 
16-1 Between Monopoly and Perfect Competition
The previous two chapters analyzed markets with many competitive firms and 
markets with a single monopoly firm. In Chapter 14, we saw that the price in a 
perfectly competitive market always equals the marginal cost of production. We 
also saw that, in the long run, entry and exit drive economic profit to zero, so the 
price also equals average total cost. In Chapter 
--- PAGE 350 ---
CHAPTER 16   MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION
A second type of imperfectly competitive market is called monopolistic 
competition. This describes a market structure in which there are many firms 
selling products that are similar but not identical. In a monopolistically competi-
tive market, each firm has a monopoly over the product it makes, but many other 
firms make similar products that compete for the same customers.
To be more precise, monopolistic competition describes a market with the fol-
• Many sellers: There are many firms competing for the same group of customers.
• Product differentiation: Each firm produces a product that is at least slightly 
different from those of other firms. Thus, rather than being a price taker, each 
firm faces a downward-sloping demand curve.
• Free entry and exit: Firms can enter or exit the market without restriction. 
Thus, the number of firms in the market adjusts until economic profits are 
A moment’s thought reveals a long list of markets with these attributes: books, 
computer games, restaurants, piano lessons, cookies, clothing, and so on.
Monopolistic competition, like oligopoly, is a market structure that lies 
 between the extreme cases of perfect competition and monopoly. But oligopoly 
and  monopolistic competition are quite different. Oligopoly departs from the per-
fectly competitive ideal of Chapter 14 because there are only a few
--- PAGE 351 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
market is a monopoly. If there are only a few firms, the market is an oligopoly. If 
there are many firms, we need to ask another question: Do the firms sell identical 
or differentiated products? If the many firms sell identical products, the market is 
perfectly competitive. But if the many firms sell differentiated products, the mar-
ket is monopolistically competitive. 
Because reality is never as clear-cut as theory, at times you may find it 
hard to decide what structure best describes a market. There is, for instance, 
no magic number that separates “few” from “many” when counting the 
 number of firms. (Do the approximately dozen companies that now sell cars 
in the United States make this market an oligopoly, or is the market more 
competitive? The answer is open to debate.) Similarly, there is no sure way 
to  determine when products are differentiated and when they are identical. 
(Are different brands of milk really the same? Again, the answer is debatable.) 
When analyzing actual markets, economists have to keep in mind the lessons 
learned from studying all types of market structure and then apply each les-
son as it seems appropriate.
Now that we understand how economists define the various types of market 
structure, we can continue our analysis of each of them. In this chapter we exam-
ine monopolistic com
--- PAGE 352 ---
CHAPTER 16   MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION
All this should seem familiar. A monopolistically competitive firm chooses its 
quantity and price just as a monopoly does. In the short run, these two types of 
market structure are similar.
16-2b The Long-Run Equilibrium
The situations depicted in Figure 2 do not last long. When firms are making prof-
its, as in panel (a), new firms have an incentive to enter the market. This entry 
increases the number of products from which customers can choose and, there-
fore, reduces the demand faced by each firm already in the market. In other 
words, profit encourages entry, and entry shifts the demand curves faced by the 
incumbent firms to the left. As the demand for incumbent firms’ products falls, 
these firms experience declining profit. 
Conversely, when firms are making losses, as in panel (b), firms in the mar-
ket have an incentive to exit. As firms exit, customers have fewer products from 
which to choose. This decrease in the number of firms expands the demand faced 
by those firms that stay in the market. In other words, losses encourage exit, and 
exit shifts the demand curves of the remaining firms to the right. As the demand 
for the remaining firms’ products rises, these firms experience rising profits (that 
This process of entry and exit continues until the firms in the market are mak-
ing exactly zero economic profit. Figure 3 de
--- PAGE 353 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
A Monopolistic Competitor  
In a monopolistically competitive 
market, if firms are making prof-
its, new firms enter, causing the 
demand curves for the incumbent 
firms to shift to the left. Similarly, 
if firms are making losses, some 
of the firms in the market exit, 
causing the demand curves of the 
remaining firms to shift to the right. 
Because of these shifts in demand, 
monopolistically competitive firms 
eventually find themselves in the 
long-run equilibrium shown here. 
In this long-run equilibrium, price 
equals average total cost, and each 
Notice that the demand curve in this figure just barely touches the 
average- total-cost curve. Mathematically, we say the two curves are tangent to 
each other. These two curves must be tangent once entry and exit have driven 
profit to zero. Because profit per unit sold is the difference between price (found 
on the demand curve) and average total cost, the maximum profit is zero only if 
these two curves touch each other without crossing. Also note that this point of 
tangency occurs at the same quantity where marginal revenue equals marginal 
cost. That these two points line up is not a coincidence: It is required because this 
particular quantity maximizes profit and the maximum profit is exactly zero in 
To sum up, two characteristics describe the long-run equilibri
--- PAGE 354 ---
CHAPTER 16   MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION
equilibrium with perfect competition.) There are two noteworthy differences 
 between monopolistic and perfect competition: excess capacity and the markup. 
Excess Capacity   As we have just seen, the process of entry and exit drives each 
firm in a monopolistically competitive market to a point of tangency  between 
its demand and average-total-cost curves. Panel (a) of Figure 4 shows that the 
quantity of output at this point is smaller than the quantity that  minimizes 
 average total cost. Thus, under monopolistic competition, firms produce on 
the  downward-sloping portion of their average-total-cost curves. In this way, 
 monopolistic competition contrasts starkly with perfect competition. As panel (b) 
of Figure 4 shows, free entry in competitive markets drives firms to produce at the 
minimum of average total cost. 
The quantity that minimizes average total cost is called the efficient scale of the 
firm. In the long run, perfectly competitive firms produce at the efficient scale, 
whereas monopolistically competitive firms produce below this level. Firms are 
said to have excess capacity under monopolistic competition. In other words, a 
monopolistically competitive firm, unlike a perfectly competitive firm, could 
 increase the quantity it produces and lower the average total cost of production. 
The firm forgoes this opportunity 
--- PAGE 355 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
Markup over Marginal Cost   A second difference between perfect competition 
and monopolistic competition is the relationship between price and marginal cost. 
For a perfectly competitive firm, such as the one shown in panel (b) of  Figure 4, 
price equals marginal cost. For a monopolistically competitive firm, such as the 
one shown in panel (a), price exceeds marginal cost because the firm always has 
How is this markup over marginal cost consistent with free entry and zero 
profit? The zero-profit condition ensures only that price equals average total cost. 
It does not ensure that price equals marginal cost. Indeed, in the long-run equilib-
rium, monopolistically competitive firms operate on the declining portion of their 
average-total-cost curves, so marginal cost is below average total cost. Thus, for 
price to equal average total cost, price must be above marginal cost.
In this relationship between price and marginal cost, we see a key behavioral 
difference between perfect competitors and monopolistic competitors. Imagine 
that you were to ask a firm the following question: “Would you like to see another 
customer come through your door ready to buy from you at your current price?” 
A perfectly competitive firm would answer that it didn’t care. Because price 
exactly equals marginal cost, the profit from an extra 
--- PAGE 356 ---
CHAPTER 16   MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION
According to an old quip, monopolistically competitive markets are those in 
which sellers send Christmas cards to the buyers. Trying to attract more custom-
ers makes sense only if price exceeds marginal cost.
16-2d Monopolistic Competition and the Welfare of Society
Is the outcome in a monopolistically competitive market desirable from the stand-
point of society as a whole? Can policymakers improve on the market outcome? 
In previous chapters we evaluated markets from the standpoint of efficiency 
by asking whether society is getting the most it can out of its scarce resources. 
We learned that competitive markets lead to efficient outcomes, unless there are 
externalities, whereas monopoly markets lead to deadweight losses. Monopolis-
tically competitive markets are more complex than either of these polar cases, so 
evaluating welfare in these markets is a more subtle exercise.
One source of inefficiency in monopolistically competitive markets is the 
markup of price over marginal cost. Because of the markup, some consumers who 
value the good at more than the marginal cost of production (but less than the 
price) will be deterred from buying it. Thus, a monopolistically competitive mar-
ket has the normal deadweight loss of monopoly pricing.
This outcome is undesirable compared with the efficient quantity that arises 
when price equals
--- PAGE 357 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
always eager to sell additional units. Conversely, because perfectly competitive 
firms produce identical goods and charge a price equal to marginal cost, neither 
of these externalities exists under perfect competition.
In the end, we can conclude only that monopolistically competitive markets do 
not have all the desirable welfare properties of perfectly competitive markets. That 
is, the invisible hand does not ensure that total surplus is maximized under monop-
olistic competition. Yet because the inefficiencies are subtle, hard to measure, and 
hard to fix, there is no easy way for public policy to improve the market outcome.
List the three key attributes of monopolistic competition. • Draw and 
explain a diagram to show the long-run equilibrium in a  monopolistically com-
petitive market. How does this equilibrium differ from that in a perfectly competitive market?
It is nearly impossible to go through a typical day in a modern economy without 
being bombarded with advertising. Whether you are surfing the Internet, posting 
on Facebook, reading a magazine, watching television, or driving down the high-
way, some firm will try to convince you to buy its product. Such behavior is a nat-
ural feature of monopolistic competition (as well as some oligopolistic industries). 
When firms sell differentiated products and char
--- PAGE 358 ---
CHAPTER 16   MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION
goods, thereby making the demand for a particular brand less elastic. When a 
firm faces a less elastic demand curve, it can increase its profits by charging a 
larger markup over marginal cost.
The Defense of Advertising  Defenders of advertising argue that firms use adver-
tising to provide information to customers. Advertising conveys the prices of the 
goods offered for sale, the existence of new products, and the locations of retail 
outlets. This information allows customers to make better choices about what to 
buy and, thus, enhances the ability of markets to allocate resources efficiently.
Defenders also argue that advertising fosters competition. Because advertising 
allows customers to be more fully informed about all the firms in the market, cus-
tomers can more easily take advantage of price differences. Thus, each firm has 
less market power. In addition, advertising allows new firms to enter more easily 
because it gives entrants a means to attract customers from existing firms.
Over time, policymakers have come to accept the view that advertising can 
make markets more competitive. One important example is the regulation of 
 advertising for certain professions, such as lawyers, doctors, and pharmacists. In 
the past, these groups succeeded in getting state governments to prohibit advertis-
ing in their fields on the grounds
--- PAGE 359 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
16-3b Advertising as a Signal of Quality
Many types of advertising contain little apparent information about the product 
being advertised. Consider a firm introducing a new breakfast cereal. The firm 
might saturate the airwaves with advertisements showing some actor eating the 
cereal and exclaiming how wonderful it tastes. How much information does the 
advertisement really provide?
The answer is more than you might think. Defenders of advertising argue that 
even advertising that appears to contain little hard information may in fact tell 
consumers something about product quality. The willingness of the firm to spend 
a large amount of money on advertising can itself be a signal to consumers about 
the quality of the product being offered.
Consider the problem facing two firms—General Mills and Kellogg. Each com-
pany has just come up with a recipe for a new cereal, which it would sell for $3 a 
box. To keep things simple, let’s assume that the marginal cost of making cereal is 
zero, so the $3 is all profit. Each company knows that if it spends $10 million on 
advertising, it will get 1 million consumers to try its new cereal. And each company 
knows that if consumers like the cereal, they will buy it not once but many times. 
First consider General Mills’ decision. Based on market research, General Mills 
knows that
--- PAGE 360 ---
CHAPTER 16   MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION
This theory can explain why firms pay famous actors large amounts of money 
to make advertisements that, on the surface, appear to convey no information at 
all. The information is not in the advertisement’s content but simply in its exis-
Advertising is closely related to the existence of brand names. In many markets, 
there are two types of firms. Some firms sell products with widely recognized 
brand names, while other firms sell generic substitutes. For example, in a typical 
drugstore, you can find Bayer aspirin on the shelf next to generic aspirin. In a 
typical grocery store, you can find Pepsi next to less familiar colas. Most often, the 
firm with the brand name spends more on advertising and charges a higher price 
Just as there is disagreement about the economics of advertising, there is dis-
agreement about the economics of brand names. Let’s consider both sides of the 
Critics argue that brand names cause consumers to perceive differences that do 
not really exist. In many cases, the generic good is almost indistinguishable from the 
brand-name good. Consumers’ willingness to pay more for the brand-name good, 
these critics assert, is a form of irrationality fostered by advertising.  Economist 
 Edward Chamberlin, one of the early developers of the theory of  monopolistic 
 competition, concluded from this argument that brand n
--- PAGE 361 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
The McDonald’s brand name also ensures that the company has an incentive to 
maintain quality. For example, if some customers were to become ill from spoiled 
food sold at a McDonald’s, the news would be disastrous for the company. 
McDonald’s would lose much of the valuable reputation that it has built up with 
years of expensive advertising. As a result, it would lose sales and profit not only 
in the outlet that sold the bad food but also in many other McDonald’s outlets 
throughout the country. By contrast, if some customers were to become ill from 
bad food at a local restaurant, that restaurant might have to close down, but the 
lost profits would be much smaller. Hence, McDonald’s has a greater incentive to 
ensure that its food is safe.
The debate over brand names thus centers on the question of whether consum-
ers are rational in preferring brand names to generic substitutes. Critics argue 
that brand names are the result of an irrational consumer response to advertising. 
Defenders argue that consumers have good reason to pay more for brand-name 
products because they can be more confident in the quality of these products. 
How might advertising make markets less competitive? How might it make 
markets more competitive? • Give the arguments for and against brand names.
Rule for maximizing profit
Features that mon
--- PAGE 362 ---
CHAPTER 16   MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION
Because monopolistically competitive firms produce differentiated  products, 
each firm advertises to attract customers to its own brand. To some extent, 
 advertising manipulates consumers’ tastes, promotes irrational brand loyalty, and 
impedes competition. To a larger extent, advertising provides information, estab-
lishes brand names of reliable quality, and fosters competition. 
The theory of monopolistic competition seems to describe many markets in the 
economy. It is somewhat disappointing, therefore, that the theory does not yield 
simple and compelling advice for public policy. From the standpoint of the eco-
nomic theorist, the allocation of resources in monopolistically competitive mar-
kets is not perfect. Yet from the standpoint of a practical policymaker, there may 
be little that can be done to improve it.
1. Which of the following conditions does NOT describe 
a firm in a monopolistically competitive market?
a. It sells a product different from its competitors.
b. It takes its price as given by market conditions.
c. It maximizes profit both in the short run and in the 
d. It has the freedom to enter or exit in the long run.
2. Which of the following markets best fits the definition 
of monopolistic competition?
3. A monopolistically competitive firm will increase its 
a. marginal revenue is greater than marginal cost.
b. ma
--- PAGE 363 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
monopolistic competition, p. 321
1. Describe the three attributes of monopolistic competi-
tion. How is monopolistic competition like monopoly? 
How is it like perfect competition?
2. Draw a diagram depicting a firm that is making a 
profit in a monopolistically competitive market. Now 
show what happens to this firm as new firms enter the 
3. Draw a diagram of the long-run equilibrium in a 
monopolistically competitive market. How is price 
related to average total cost? How is price related to 
4. Does a monopolistic competitor produce too much or 
too little output compared to the most efficient level? 
What practical considerations make it difficult for  
policymakers to solve this problem?
5. How might advertising reduce economic well-being? 
How might advertising increase economic well-being?
6. How might advertising with no apparent infor-
mational content in fact convey information to 
7. Explain two benefits that might arise from the 
 existence of brand names.
1. Among monopoly, oligopoly, monopolistic competi-
tion, and perfect competition, how would you classify 
the markets for each of the following drinks?
2. Classify the following markets as perfectly competi-
tive, monopolistic, or monopolistically competitive, 
c. local electricity service
3. For each of the following characteristics, say whether 
it descr
--- PAGE 364 ---
CHAPTER 16   MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION
6. Sparkle is one of the many firms in the market for 
toothpaste, which is in long-run equilibrium.
a. Draw a diagram showing Sparkle’s demand 
curve, marginal-revenue curve, average-total-cost 
curve, and marginal-cost curve. Label Sparkle’s 
profit-maximizing output and price.
b. What is Sparkle’s profit? Explain.
c. On your diagram, show the consumer surplus 
derived from the purchase of Sparkle toothpaste. 
Also show the deadweight loss relative to the 
 efficient level of output.
d. If the government forced Sparkle to produce the 
efficient level of output, what would happen 
to the firm? What would happen to Sparkle’s 
7. Consider a monopolistically competitive market with 
N firms. Each firm’s business opportunities are  
described by the following equations:
Marginal Revenue: MR 5 100/N 2 2Q
a. How does N, the number of firms in the market, 
affect each firm’s demand curve? Why?
b. How many units does each firm produce? 
(The answers to this and the next two  
c. What price does each firm charge?
d. How much profit does each firm make?
e. In the long run, how many firms will exist in this 
8. The market for peanut butter in Nutville is monop-
olistically competitive and in long-run equilibrium. 
One day, consumer advocate Skippy Jif discovers that 
all brands of peanut butter in Nutville are identical. 
Thereafter, the market becom
--- PAGE 365 ---

--- PAGE 366 ---
f you play tennis, you have probably used balls from one of four producers: 
Penn, Wilson, Prince, or Dunlop Slazenger (two brands from the same com-
pany). These four firms make almost all the tennis balls sold in the United 
States. Together they determine the quantity of tennis balls produced and, given 
the market demand curve, the price at which tennis balls are sold.
The market for tennis balls is an example of an oligopoly. The essence of an 
oligopolistic market is that there are only a few sellers. As a result, the actions of 
any one seller in the market can have a large impact on the profits of all the other 
sellers. Oligopolistic firms are interdependent in a way that competitive firms 
are not. Our goal in this chapter is to see how this interdependence 
shapes the firms’ behavior and what problems it raises 
a market structure in which 
only a few sellers offer similar 
--- PAGE 367 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
The analysis of oligopoly offers an opportunity to introduce game theory, the 
study of how people behave in strategic situations. By “strategic” we mean a situ-
ation in which a person, when choosing among alternative courses of action, must 
consider how others might respond to the action she takes. Strategic thinking is 
crucial not only in checkers, chess, and tic-tac-toe but also in many business deci-
sions. Because oligopolistic markets have only a small number of firms, each firm 
must act strategically. Each firm knows that its profit depends on both how much 
it produces and how much the other firms produce. In making its production de-
cision, each firm in an oligopoly should consider how its decision might affect the 
production decisions of the other firms in the market.
Game theory is not necessary for understanding competitive or monopoly mar-
kets. In a market that is either perfectly competitive or monopolistically competi-
tive, each firm is so small compared to the market that strategic interactions with 
other firms are not important. In a monopolized market, strategic interactions are 
absent because the market has only one firm. But, as we will see, game theory is 
useful for understanding oligopolies and many other situations in which a small 
number of players interact with one another. Game theory 
--- PAGE 368 ---
17-1b Competition, Monopolies, and Cartels
Before considering the price and quantity of water that results from the duopoly 
of Jack and Jill, let’s discuss briefly what the outcome would be if the water mar-
ket were either perfectly competitive or monopolistic. These two polar cases are 
If the market for water were perfectly competitive, the production decisions 
of each firm would drive price to equal marginal cost. Because we have assumed 
that the marginal cost of pumping additional water is zero, the equilibrium price 
of water under perfect competition would be zero as well. The equilibrium quan-
tity would be 120 gallons. The price of water would reflect the cost of producing 
it, and the efficient quantity of water would be produced and consumed.
Now consider how a monopoly would behave. Table 1 shows that total profit 
is maximized at a quantity of 60 gallons and a price of $60 a gallon. A profit-
maximizing monopolist, therefore, would produce this quantity and charge this 
price. As is standard for monopolies, price would exceed marginal cost. The  result 
would be inefficient, because the quantity of water produced and consumed 
would fall short of the socially efficient level of 120 gallons.
What outcome should we expect from our duopolists? One possibility is that 
Jack and Jill get together and agree on the quantity of water to produce and the 
price to charge 
--- PAGE 369 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
split the monopoly production of 60 gallons. Each member of the cartel will want 
a larger share of the market because a larger market share means larger profit. If 
Jack and Jill agree to split the market equally, each produces 30 gallons, the price 
is $60 a gallon, and each earns a profit of $1,800.
17-1c The Equilibrium for an Oligopoly
Oligopolists would like to form cartels and earn monopoly profits, but that is 
 often impossible. Squabbling among cartel members over how to divide the profit 
in the market can make agreement among members difficult. In addition, anti-
trust laws prohibit explicit agreements among oligopolists as a matter of public 
policy. Even talking about pricing and production restrictions with competitors 
can be a criminal offense. Let’s therefore consider what happens if Jack and Jill 
decide separately how much water to produce.
At first, one might expect Jack and Jill to reach the monopoly outcome on their 
own, because this outcome maximizes their joint profit. In the absence of a bind-
ing agreement, however, the monopoly outcome is unlikely. To see why, imagine 
that Jack expects Jill to produce only 30 gallons (half of the monopoly quantity). 
Jack would reason as follows:
“I could produce 30 gallons as well. In this case, a total of 60 gallons of water 
would be sold at a price of $60 
--- PAGE 370 ---
This example illustrates the tension between cooperation and 
self-interest. Oligopolists would be better off cooperating and 
reaching the monopoly outcome. Yet because they each pursue 
their own self-interest, they do not end up reaching the monop-
oly outcome and, thus, fail to maximize their joint profit. Each 
oligopolist is tempted to raise production and capture a larger 
share of the market. As each of them tries to do this, total pro-
duction rises, and the price falls. 
At the same time, self-interest does not drive the market all 
the way to the competitive outcome. Like monopolists, oligopo-
lists are aware that increasing the amount they produce reduces 
the price of their product, which in turn affects profits. There-
fore, they stop short of following the competitive firm’s rule of 
producing up to the point where price equals marginal cost.
In summary, when firms in an oligopoly individually choose pro-
duction to maximize profit, they produce a quantity of output greater 
than the level produced by monopoly and less than the level produced 
by perfect competition. The oligopoly price is less than the monopoly 
price but greater than the competitive price (which equals marginal 
17-1d  How the Size of an Oligopoly Affects  
We can use the insights from this analysis of duopoly to discuss 
how the size of an oligopoly is likely to affect the outcome in 
a market
--- PAGE 371 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
If the output effect is larger than the price effect, the well owner will increase pro-
duction. If the price effect is larger than the output effect, the owner will not raise 
production. (In fact, in this case, it is profitable to reduce production.) Each oli-
gopolist continues to increase production until these two marginal effects exactly 
balance, taking the other firms’ production as given.
Now consider how the number of firms in the industry affects the marginal 
analysis of each oligopolist. The larger the number of sellers, the less each seller 
is concerned about her own impact on the market price. That is, as the oligopoly 
grows in size, the magnitude of the price effect falls. When the oligopoly grows 
very large, the price effect disappears altogether. In this extreme case, the produc-
tion decision of an individual firm no longer affects the market price. Each firm 
takes the market price as given when deciding how much to produce and, there-
fore increases production as long as price is above marginal cost. 
We can now see that a large oligopoly is essentially a group of competitive 
firms. A competitive firm considers only the output effect when deciding how 
much to produce: Because a competitive firm is a price taker, the price effect is 
 absent. Thus, as the number of sellers in an oligopoly grows lar
--- PAGE 372 ---
17-2a The Prisoners’ Dilemma 
The prisoners’ dilemma is a story about two criminals who have been captured by 
the police. Let’s call them Bonnie and Clyde. The police have enough evidence to 
convict Bonnie and Clyde of the minor crime of carrying an unregistered gun, so 
that each would spend a year in jail. The police also suspect that the two criminals 
have committed a bank robbery together, but they lack hard evidence to convict 
them of this major crime. The police question Bonnie and Clyde in separate rooms 
and offer each of them the following deal:
“Right now, we can lock you up for 1 year. If you confess to the bank robbery 
and implicate your partner, however, we’ll give you immunity and you can go 
free. Your partner will get 20 years in jail. But if you both confess to the crime, we 
won’t need your testimony and we can avoid the cost of a trial, so you will each 
get an intermediate sentence of 8 years.”
If Bonnie and Clyde, heartless bank robbers that they are, care only about their 
own individual sentences, what would you expect them to do? Figure 1 shows 
their choices. Each prisoner has two strategies: confess or remain silent. The sen-
tence each prisoner gets depends on the strategy he or she chooses and the strat-
egy chosen by his or her partner in crime. 
Consider first Bonnie’s decision. She reasons as follows: “I don’t know what 
Clyde is going to do.
--- PAGE 373 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
In the end, both Bonnie and Clyde confess, and both spend 8 years in jail. This 
outcome is a Nash equilibrium: Each criminal is choosing the best strategy avail-
able, given the strategy the other is following. Yet, from their standpoint, the out-
come is terrible. If they had both remained silent, both of them would have been 
better off, spending only 1 year in jail on the gun charge. Because each pursues his 
or her own interests, the two prisoners together reach an outcome that is worse 
You might have thought that Bonnie and Clyde would have foreseen this sit-
run into problems. Imagine that, before the police captured Bonnie and Clyde, 
the two criminals had made a pact not to confess. Clearly, this agreement would 
make them both better off if they both lived up to it, because they would each 
spend only 1 year in jail. But would the two criminals in fact remain silent, sim-
ply because they had agreed to? Once they are being questioned separately, the 
logic of self-interest takes over and leads them to confess. Cooperation between 
the two prisoners is difficult to maintain, because cooperation is individually 
17-2b Oligopolies as a Prisoners’ Dilemma
What does the prisoners’ dilemma have to do with markets and imperfect compe-
tition? It turns out that the game oligopolists play in trying to reach the monop-
ol
--- PAGE 374 ---
a profit of $2,000 by selling 40 gallons and $1,800 by selling 30 gallons. In this 
case, I am better off with the higher-level production. If Jill fails to live up to the 
agreement and produces 40 gallons, then I earn $1,600 by selling 40 gallons and 
$1,500 by selling 30 gallons. Once again, I am better off with higher production. 
So, regardless of what Jill chooses to do, I am better off reneging on our agreement 
and producing at the higher level.”
Producing 40 gallons is a dominant strategy for Jack. Of course, Jill reasons in 
exactly the same way, and so both produce at the higher level of 40 gallons. The 
result is the inferior outcome (from Jack and Jill’s standpoint) with low profits for 
each of the two producers.
This example illustrates why oligopolies have trouble maintaining monop-
oly profits. The monopoly outcome is jointly rational, but each oligopolist has 
an  incentive to cheat. Just as self-interest drives the prisoners in the prisoners’ 
 dilemma to confess, self-interest makes it difficult for the oligopolists to maintain 
the cooperative outcome with low production, high prices, and monopoly profits.
OPEC AND THE WORLD OIL MARKET
Our story about the town’s market for water is fictional, but if we 
change water to crude oil, and Jack and Jill to Iran and Iraq, the 
story is close to being true. Much of the world’s oil is produced by 
a few countries, m
--- PAGE 375 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
17-2c Other Examples of the Prisoners’ Dilemma
We have seen how the prisoners’ dilemma can be used to understand the problem 
facing oligopolies. The same logic applies to many other situations as well. Here 
we consider two examples in which self-interest prevents cooperation and leads 
to an inferior outcome for the parties involved.
Arms Races  In the decades after World War II, the world’s two superpowers—
tion over military power. This topic motivated some of the early work on game 
theory. The game theorists pointed out that an arms race is much like the prison-
To see why, consider the decisions of the United States and the Soviet Union 
about whether to build new weapons or to disarm. Each country prefers to have 
more arms than the other because a larger arsenal would give it more influence in 
world affairs. But each country also prefers to live in a world safe from the other 
Figure 3 shows the deadly game. If the Soviet Union chooses to arm, the United 
States is better off doing the same to prevent the loss of power. If the Soviet Union 
chooses to disarm, the United States is better off arming because doing so would 
make it more powerful. For each country, arming is a dominant strategy. Thus, 
each country chooses to continue the arms race, resulting in the inferior outcome 
with both countries at risk.
Thro
--- PAGE 376 ---
Common Resources  In Chapter 11 we saw that people tend to overuse common 
resources. One can view this problem as an example of the prisoners’ dilemma.
Imagine that two oil companies—Exxon and Texaco—own adjacent oil fields. 
Under the fields is a common pool of oil worth $12 million. Drilling a well to 
 recover the oil costs $1 million. If each company drills one well, each will get half 
of the oil and earn a $5 million profit ($6 million in revenue minus $1 million in 
Because the pool of oil is a common resource, the companies will not use it 
 efficiently. Suppose that either company could drill a second well. If one company 
has two of the three wells, that company gets two-thirds of the oil, which yields 
a profit of $6 million. The other company gets one-third of the oil, for a profit of 
$3 million. Yet if each company drills a second well, the two companies again split 
the oil. In this case, each bears the cost of a second well, so profit is only $4 million 
Figure 4 shows the game. Drilling two wells is a dominant strategy for each 
company. Once again, the self-interest of the two players leads them to an inferior 
17-2d The Prisoners’ Dilemma and the Welfare of Society
The prisoners’ dilemma describes many of life’s situations, and it shows that 
cooperation can be difficult to maintain, even when cooperation would make 
both players in the game better off. Clea
--- PAGE 377 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
of the product. As we first saw in Chapter 7, the competitive outcome is best for 
society because it maximizes total surplus. When oligopolists fail to cooperate, 
the quantity they produce is closer to this optimal level. Put differently, the invis-
ible hand guides markets to allocate resources efficiently only when markets are 
competitive, and markets are competitive only when firms in the market fail to 
cooperate with one another.
Similarly, consider the case of the police questioning two suspects. Lack of 
cooperation between the suspects is desirable, for it allows the police to convict 
more criminals. The prisoners’ dilemma is a dilemma for the prisoners, but it can 
be a boon to everyone else. 
17-2e Why People Sometimes Cooperate
The prisoners’ dilemma shows that cooperation is difficult. But is it impossible? 
Not all prisoners, when questioned by the police, decide to turn in their partners 
in crime. Cartels sometimes manage to maintain collusive arrangements, despite 
the incentive for individual members to defect. Very often, players can solve the 
prisoners’ dilemma because they play the game not once but many times.
To see why cooperation is easier to enforce in repeated games, let’s return to 
our duopolists, Jack and Jill, whose choices were given in Figure 2. Jack and Jill 
would like to agree to mai
--- PAGE 378 ---
To see what strategies work best, political scientist Robert Axelrod held a tourna-
ment. People entered by submitting computer programs designed to play repeated 
prisoners’ dilemma. Each program then played the game against all the other pro-
grams. The “winner” was the program that received the fewest total years in jail.
The winning program turned out to be a simple strategy called tit-for-tat. 
 According to tit-for-tat, a player should start by cooperating and then do whatever 
the other player did last time. Thus, a tit-for-tat player cooperates until the other 
player defects; then she defects until the other player cooperates again. In other 
words, this strategy starts out friendly, penalizes unfriendly players, and forgives 
them if warranted. To Axelrod’s surprise, this simple strategy did better than all the 
more complicated strategies that people had sent in. 
The tit-for-tat strategy has a long history. It is essentially the biblical strategy of 
“an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth.” The prisoners’ dilemma tournament sug-
gests that this may be a good rule of thumb for playing some of the games of life. ●
Tell the story of the prisoners’ dilemma. Write down a table showing the 
prisoners’ choices and explain which outcome is likely. • What does the 
prisoners’ dilemma teach us about oligopolies?
17-3 Public Policy toward Oligopolies
One of the Ten Principles
--- PAGE 379 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
The Sherman Act elevated agreements among oligopolists from unenforceable 
contracts to criminal conspiracies. 
The Clayton Act of 1914 further strengthened the antitrust laws. According to 
this law, if a person could prove that she was damaged by an illegal arrangement 
to restrain trade, that person could sue and recover three times the damages she 
sustained. The purpose of this unusual rule of triple damages is to encourage pri-
vate lawsuits against conspiring oligopolists. 
Today, both the U.S. Justice Department and private parties have the authority 
to bring legal suits to enforce the antitrust laws. As we discussed in  Chapter 15, 
these laws are used to prevent mergers that would lead to excessive market power 
in any single firm. In addition, these laws are used to prevent oligopolists from 
acting together in ways that would make their markets less competitive.
Firms in oligopolies have a strong incentive to collude in order to 
reduce production, raise prices, and increase profits. The great 
18th-century economist Adam Smith was well aware of this poten-
tial market failure. In The Wealth of Nations he wrote, “People of the same trade sel-
dom meet together, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the  public, 
or in some diversion to raise prices.” 
To see a modern example of Smith’s observation,
--- PAGE 380 ---
among competing firms should be illegal. Yet the antitrust laws have been used 
to condemn some business practices whose effects are not obvious. Here we con-
Resale Price Maintenance  One example of a controversial business practice is 
At first, resale price maintenance might seem anticompetitive and, therefore, 
detrimental to society. Like an agreement among members of a cartel, it prevents 
the retailers from competing on price. For this reason, the courts have at times 
viewed resale price maintenance as a violation of the antitrust laws.
Yet some economists defend resale price maintenance on two grounds. First, 
wanted to exert its market power, it would do so by raising the wholesale price 
discourage competition among its retailers. Indeed, because a cartel of retailers 
its retailers were a cartel.
Second, economists believe that resale price maintenance has a legitimate goal. 
a knowledgeable sales force. Yet, without resale price maintenance, some custom-
ers would take advantage of one store’s service to learn about the Blu-ray player’s 
special features and then buy the item at a discount retailer that does not provide 
this service. Good customer service can be viewed as a public good among the 
person provides a public good, others are able to enjoy it without paying for it. 
In this case, discount retailers would free ride on the service provided by other 
reta
--- PAGE 381 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
if ever, a profitable business strategy. Why? For a price war to drive out a rival, 
prices have to be driven below cost. Yet if Coyote starts selling cheap tickets at a 
loss, it had better be ready to fly more planes, because low fares will attract more 
customers. Roadrunner, meanwhile, can respond to Coyote’s predatory move by 
cutting back on flights. As a result, Coyote ends up bearing more than 80 percent 
of the losses, putting Roadrunner in a good position to survive the price war. As 
in the old Roadrunner–Coyote cartoons, the predator suffers more than the prey.
Economists continue to debate whether predatory pricing should be a concern 
for antitrust policymakers. Various questions remain unresolved. Is predatory 
pricing ever a profitable business strategy? If so, when? Are the courts capable of 
telling which price cuts are competitive and thus good for consumers and which 
are predatory? There are no simple answers.
Tying  A third example of a controversial business practice is tying. Suppose 
that Makemoney Movies produces two new films—The Avengers and Hamlet. If 
Makemoney offers theaters the two films together at a single price, rather than 
separately, the studio is said to be tying its two products. 
it. The court reasoned as follows: Imagine that The Avengers is a blockbuster and 
Hamlet is an unprofi
--- PAGE 382 ---
world’s richest men (Bill Gates) against one of the world’s most powerful regu-
latory agencies (the U.S. Justice Department). Testifying for the government was 
a prominent economist (MIT professor Franklin Fisher). Testifying for Microsoft 
was another prominent economist (MIT professor Richard Schmalensee). At stake 
was the future of one of the world’s most valuable companies (Microsoft) in one 
of the economy’s fastest-growing industries (computer software). 
A central issue in the Microsoft case involved tying—in particular, whether 
Microsoft should be allowed to integrate its Internet browser into its Windows 
operating system. The government claimed that Microsoft was bundling these two 
products together to expand its market power in computer operating systems into 
the unrelated market of Internet browsers. Allowing Microsoft to incorporate such 
products into its operating system, the government argued, would deter other soft-
ware companies from entering the market and offering new products.
Microsoft responded by pointing out that putting new features into old prod-
ucts is a natural part of technological progress. Cars today include CD players and 
air conditioners, which were once sold separately, and cameras come with built-in 
flashes. The same is true with operating systems. Over time, Microsoft has added 
many features to Windows that were previously stand-a
--- PAGE 383 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
Oligopolies would like to act like monopolies, but self-interest drives them 
toward competition. Where oligopolies end up on this spectrum depends on the 
number of firms in the oligopoly and how cooperative the firms are. The story of 
the prisoners’ dilemma shows why oligopolies can fail to maintain cooperation, 
even when cooperation is in their best interest.
Policymakers regulate the behavior of oligopolists through the antitrust laws. 
The proper scope of these laws is the subject of ongoing debate. Although price 
fixing among competing firms clearly reduces economic welfare and should 
be illegal, some business practices that appear to reduce competition may have 
legitimate if subtle purposes. As a result, policymakers need to be careful when 
they use the substantial powers of the antitrust laws to place limits on firm 
Google may be the next big target for 
EU Files Formal Antitrust Charges 
he European Commission took direct aim 
at  Google Inc. Wednesday, charging the 
 Internet-search giant with skewing results to 
favor its comparison-shopping service. But the 
formal complaint may only be the opening salvo 
in a broader assault that prompts big changes 
European antitrust chief Margrethe 
 Vestager said she continues to examine other 
 domains, such as travel and local services, 
where  Google is accused o
--- PAGE 384 ---
• Oligopolists maximize their total profits by forming a 
cartel and acting like a monopolist. Yet, if oligopolists 
make decisions about production levels individually, 
the result is a greater quantity and a lower price than 
under the monopoly outcome. The larger the number 
of firms in the oligopoly, the closer the quantity and 
price will be to the levels that would prevail under per-
• The prisoners’ dilemma shows that self-interest can 
prevent people from maintaining cooperation, even 
when cooperation is in their mutual interest. The logic 
of the prisoners’ dilemma applies in many situations, 
including arms races, common-resource problems, and 
• Policymakers use the antitrust laws to prevent oligop-
tion. The application of these laws can be controversial, 
because some behavior that can appear to reduce com-
petition may in fact have legitimate business purposes.
1. The key feature of an oligopolistic market is that
a. each firm produces a different product from other 
b. a single firm chooses a point on the market 
c. each firm takes the market price as given.
d. a small number of firms are acting strategically.
2. If an oligopolistic industry organizes itself as a coop-
erative cartel, it will produce a quantity of output that 
is ________ the competitive level and ________ the 
3. If an oligopoly does not cooperate and each firm 
chooses its own quantity, the in
--- PAGE 385 ---
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
1. If a group of sellers could form a cartel, what quantity 
and price would they try to set?
2. Compare the quantity and price of an oligopoly to 
3. Compare the quantity and price of an oligopoly to 
those of a competitive market.
4. How does the number of firms in an oligopoly affect 
the outcome in the market?
5. What is the prisoners’ dilemma, and what does it have 
6. Give two examples other than oligopoly that show 
how the prisoners’ dilemma helps to explain behavior.
7. What kinds of behavior do the antitrust laws prohibit?
1. A large share of the world supply of diamonds comes 
from Russia and South Africa. Suppose that the mar-
ginal cost of mining diamonds is constant at $1,000 per 
diamond and the demand for diamonds is described 
by the following schedule:
a. If there were many suppliers of diamonds, what 
would be the price and quantity?
b. If there were only one supplier of diamonds, what 
would be the price and quantity?
c. If Russia and South Africa formed a cartel, what 
would be the price and quantity? If the countries 
split the market evenly, what would be South 
Africa’s production and profit? What would hap-
pen to South Africa’s profit if it increased its pro-
duction by 1,000 while Russia stuck to the cartel 
d. Use your answers to part (c) to explain why cartel 
agreements are often not successfu
--- PAGE 386 ---
4. Consider trade relations between the United States 
and Mexico. Assume that the leaders of the two coun-
tries believe the payoffs to alternative trade policies 
a. What is the dominant strategy for the United 
States? For Mexico? Explain.
b. Define Nash equilibrium. What is the Nash equilib-
c. In 1993, the U.S. Congress ratified the North 
American Free Trade Agreement, in which the 
United States and Mexico agreed to reduce trade 
barriers simultaneously. Do the perceived payoffs 
shown here justify this approach to trade policy? 
d. Based on your understanding of the gains from 
trade (discussed in Chapters 3 and 9), do you 
think that these payoffs actually reflect a nation’s 
welfare under the four possible outcomes?
5. Synergy and Dynaco are the only two firms in a spe-
cific high-tech industry. They face the following payoff 
matrix as they decide upon the size of their research 
a. Does Synergy have a dominant strategy? Explain.
b. Does Dynaco have a dominant strategy? Explain.
c. Is there a Nash equilibrium for this scenario?  
Explain. (Hint: Look closely at the definition of 
6. You and a classmate are assigned a project on which 
you will receive one combined grade. You each want 
to receive a good grade, but you also want to avoid 
hard work. In particular, here is the situation:
• If both of you work hard, you both get an A, which 
gives each of you 40 units o
--- PAGE 387 ---
8. Two athletes of equal ability are competing for a prize 
of $10,000. Each is deciding whether to take a danger-
ous performance-enhancing drug. If one athlete takes 
the drug and the other does not, the one who takes the 
drug wins the prize. If both or neither take the drug, 
they tie and split the prize. Taking the drug imposes 
health risks that are equivalent to a loss of X dollars.
a. Draw a 2 3 2 payoff matrix describing the 
 decisions the athletes face.
b. For what X is taking the drug the Nash 
c. Does making the drug safer (that is, lowering X) 
make the athletes better or worse off? Explain.
9. Little Kona is a small coffee company that is consid-
ering entering a market dominated by Big Brew. Each 
company’s profit depends on whether Little Kona 
enters and whether Big Brew sets a high price or a low 
a. Does either player in this game have a dominant 
b. Does your answer to part (a) help you figure out 
what the other player should do?
c. What is the Nash equilibrium? Is there only one?
d. Big Brew threatens Little Kona by saying, “If you 
enter, we’re going to set a low price, so you had 
better stay out.” Do you think Little Kona should 
believe the threat? Why or why not? 
e. If the two firms could collude and agree on how 
to split the total profits, what outcome would they 
PART V   FIRM BEHAVIOR AND THE ORGANIZATION OF INDUSTRY
--- PAGE 388 ---

