--- PAGE 218 ---
irms that make and sell paper also create, as a by-product of the manufactur-
ing process, a chemical called dioxin. Scientists believe that once dioxin enters 
the environment, it raises the population’s risk of cancer, birth defects, and 
Is the production and release of dioxin a problem for society? In Chapters 4 
through 9, we examined how markets allocate scarce resources with the forces 
of supply and demand, and we saw that the equilibrium of supply and demand 
is typically an efficient allocation of resources. To use Adam Smith’s famous 
--- PAGE 219 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
metaphor, the “invisible hand” of the marketplace leads self-interested buyers 
and sellers in a market to maximize the total benefit that society derives from 
that market. This insight is the basis for one of the Ten Principles of Economics in 
Chapter 1: Markets are usually a good way to organize economic activity. Should 
we conclude, therefore, that the invisible hand prevents firms in the paper market 
from emitting too much dioxin? 
Markets do many things well, but they do not do everything well. In this 
chapter, we begin our study of another of the Ten Principles of Economics: 
Government action can sometimes improve upon market outcomes. We examine 
why markets sometimes fail to allocate resources efficiently, how government 
policies can potentially improve the market’s allocation, and what kinds of 
policies are likely to work best. 
The market failures examined in this chapter fall under a general category 
that influences the well-being of a bystander but neither pays nor receives 
compensation for that effect. If the impact on the bystander is adverse, it is called 
a negative externality. If it is beneficial, it is called a positive externality. In the 
presence of externalities, society’s interest in a market outcome extends beyond 
the well-being of buyers and sellers who participate in the market to include the 
well-being of bystanders who are affected indirectly. Because buyers and sellers 
neglect the external effects of their actions when deciding how much to demand 
or supply, the market equilibrium is not
--- PAGE 220 ---
CHAPTER 10   EXTERNALITIES
universities cannot capture the benefits of their inventions, they will devote 
too few resources to research. The federal government addresses this prob-
lem partially through the patent system, which gives inventors exclusive use 
of their inventions for a limited time.
In each of these cases, some decision maker fails to take into account the  external 
effects of his behavior. The government responds by trying to influence this 
 behavior to protect the interests of bystanders.
10-1 Externalities and Market Inefficiency
In this section, we use the tools of welfare economics developed in Chapter 7 to 
examine how externalities affect economic well-being. The analysis shows pre-
cisely why externalities cause markets to allocate resources inefficiently. Later in 
the chapter, we examine various ways private individuals and public policymak-
ers can remedy this type of market failure.
10-1a Welfare Economics: A Recap
We begin by recalling the key lessons of welfare economics from Chapter 7. To 
make our analysis concrete, we consider a specific market—the market for alumi-
num. Figure 1 shows the supply and demand curves in the market for aluminum. 
Recall from Chapter 7 that the supply and demand curves contain important 
information about costs and benefits. The demand curve for aluminum reflects 
the value of aluminum to consumers, as measured by the prices they are willing 
to pay. At any given quantity, the height of the demand curve shows the will-
ingness to pay of the marginal buyer. In other words, it shows the value to the 
consumer of 
--- PAGE 221 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
In the absence of government intervention, the price adjusts to balance the 
supply and demand for aluminum. The quantity produced and consumed in 
the market equilibrium, shown as QMARKET in Figure 1, is efficient in the sense 
that it maximizes the sum of producer and consumer surplus. That is, the market 
 allocates resources in a way that maximizes the total value to the consumers who 
buy and use aluminum minus the total costs to the producers who make and sell 
10-1b Negative Externalities
Now let’s suppose that aluminum factories emit pollution: For each unit of alu-
minum produced, a certain amount of smoke enters the atmosphere. Because this 
smoke creates a health risk for those who breathe the air, it is a negative externality. 
How does this externality affect the efficiency of the market outcome?
Because of the externality, the cost to society of producing aluminum is larger 
than the cost to the aluminum producers. For each unit of aluminum produced, 
the social cost includes the private costs of the aluminum producers plus the costs 
to those bystanders affected adversely by the pollution. Figure 2 shows the  social 
cost of producing aluminum. The social-cost curve is above the supply curve 
because it takes into account the external costs imposed on society by aluminum 
production. The difference between these two curves reflects the cost of the pollu-
What quantity of aluminum should be produced? To answer this question, 
we once again consider what a benevolent social planner would do. The planner 
wants to max
--- PAGE 222 ---
CHAPTER 10   EXTERNALITIES
The planner would choose the level of aluminum production at which the 
 demand curve crosses the social-cost curve. This intersection determines the 
 optimal amount of aluminum from the standpoint of society as a whole. Below 
this level of production, the value of the aluminum to consumers (as measured 
by the height of the demand curve) exceeds the social cost of producing it (as 
measured by the height of the social-cost curve). Above this level of production, 
the social cost of producing additional aluminum exceeds the value to consumers.
Note that the equilibrium quantity of aluminum, QMARKET, is larger than the 
socially optimal quantity, QOPTIMUM. This inefficiency occurs because the market 
equilibrium reflects only the private costs of production. In the market equilib-
rium, the marginal consumer values aluminum at less than the social cost of pro-
ducing it. That is, at QMARKET, the demand curve lies below the social-cost curve. 
Thus, reducing aluminum production and consumption below the market equi-
librium level raises total economic well-being.
How can the social planner achieve the optimal outcome? One way would be 
to tax aluminum producers for each ton of aluminum sold. The tax would shift 
the supply curve for aluminum upward by the size of the tax. If the tax accu-
rately reflected the external cost of pollutants released into the atmosphere, the 
new supply curve would coincide with the social-cost curve. In the new market 
equilibrium, aluminum producers would produce the socially optimal quantity of 
The use of such a ta
--- PAGE 223 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
Once again, the government can correct the market failure by inducing market 
participants to internalize the externality. The appropriate response in the case of 
positive externalities is exactly the opposite to the case of negative externalities. To 
move the market equilibrium closer to the social optimum, a positive externality 
requires a subsidy. In fact, that is exactly the policy the government follows: Edu-
cation is heavily subsidized through public schools and government scholarships.
To summarize: Negative externalities lead markets to produce a larger quantity than 
is socially desirable. Positive externalities lead markets to produce a smaller quantity than 
is socially desirable. To remedy the problem, the government can internalize the exter-
nality by taxing goods that have negative externalities and subsidizing goods that have 
TECHNOLOGY SPILLOVERS, INDUSTRIAL POLICY,  
A potentially important type of positive externality is called a tech-
nology spillover—the impact of one firm’s research and production 
efforts on other firms’ access to technological advance. For example, consider the 
market for industrial robots. Robots are at the frontier of a rapidly changing tech-
nology. Whenever a firm builds a robot, there is some chance that the firm will 
discover a new and better design. This new design may benefit not only this firm 
but also society as a whole because the design will enter society’s pool of tech-
nological knowledge. That is, the new design may have positive externalities for 
other producers in
--- PAGE 224 ---
CHAPTER 10   EXTERNALITIES
How large are technology spillovers, and what do they imply for public policy? 
This is an important question because technological progress is the key to raising 
living standards over time. Yet it is also a difficult question about which economists 
Some economists believe that technology spillovers are pervasive and that the 
government should encourage those industries that yield the largest spillovers. For 
instance, these economists argue that if making computer chips yields greater spill-
overs than making potato chips, the government should encourage the production 
of computer chips relative to the production of potato chips. The U.S. tax code does 
this in a limited way by offering special tax breaks for expenditures on research 
and development. Some nations go further by subsidizing specific industries that 
supposedly yield large technology spillovers. Government intervention that aims 
to promote technology-enhancing industries is sometimes called industrial policy. 
Other economists are skeptical about industrial policy. Even if technology spill-
overs are common, pursuing an industrial policy requires the government to gauge 
the size of the spillovers from different markets. This measurement problem is 
difficult at best. Without accurate measurements, the political system may end up 
subsidizing industries with the most political clout rather than those that yield the 
largest positive externalities.
Another way to deal with technology spillovers is patent protection. The pat-
ent laws protect the rights of inventors by giving th
--- PAGE 225 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
In most cases of pollution, however, the situation is not this 
simple. Despite the stated goals of some environmentalists, 
it would be impossible to prohibit all polluting activity. For 
example, virtually all forms of transportation—even the horse—
produce some undesirable polluting by-products. But it would 
not be sensible for the government to ban all transportation. As a 
result, instead of trying to eradicate pollution entirely, society has 
to weigh the costs and benefits to decide the kinds and quantities 
of pollution it will allow. In the United States, the Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) is the government agency tasked with 
developing and enforcing regulations aimed at protecting the 
Environmental regulations can take many forms. Sometimes 
the EPA dictates a maximum level of pollution that a factory may 
emit. Other times the EPA requires that firms adopt a particular 
technology to reduce emissions. In all cases, to design good rules, 
the government regulators need to know the details about spe-
cific industries and about the alternative technologies that those 
industries could adopt. This information is often difficult for gov-
ernment regulators to obtain.
10-2b  Market-Based Policy 1: Corrective  
Instead of regulating behavior in response to an externality, 
the government can use market-based policies to align private 
incentives with social efficiency. For instance, as we saw earlier, 
the government can internalize the externality by taxing activities 
that have negative externalities and subsidiz
--- PAGE 226 ---
CHAPTER 10   EXTERNALITIES
Most economists prefer the tax. To explain this preference, they would first 
point out that a tax is just as effective as regulation in reducing the overall level of 
pollution. The EPA can achieve whatever level of pollution it wants by setting the 
tax at the appropriate level. The higher the tax, the larger the reduction in pollu-
tion. If the tax is high enough, the factories will close down altogether, reducing 
Although regulation and corrective taxes are both capable of reducing pollu-
tion, the tax accomplishes this goal more efficiently. The regulation requires each 
factory to reduce pollution by the same amount. An equal reduction, however, 
is not necessarily the least expensive way to clean up the water. It is possible 
that the paper mill can reduce pollution at lower cost than the steel mill. If so, 
the paper mill would respond to the tax by reducing pollution substantially to 
avoid the tax, whereas the steel mill would respond by reducing pollution less 
In essence, the corrective tax places a price on the right to pollute. Just as 
markets allocate goods to those buyers who value them most highly, a correc-
tive tax allocates pollution to those factories that face the highest cost of reduc-
ing it. Thus, the EPA can achieve any level of pollution at the lowest total cost by 
Economists also argue that corrective taxes are better for the environment. 
Under the command-and-control policy of regulation, the factories have no rea-
son to reduce emission further once they have reached the target of 300 tons 
of glop. By contrast, t
--- PAGE 227 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
people pay when their large, gas-guzzling vehicles impose risk on others. 
It would induce them to take this risk into account when choosing what 
r Pollution: Cars cause smog. Moreover, the burning of fossil fuels such as 
 gasoline is widely believed to be the primary cause of global warming. 
Experts disagree about how dangerous this threat is, but there is no doubt 
that the gas tax reduces the threat by discouraging the use of gasoline.
So the gas tax, rather than causing deadweight losses like most taxes, actually 
makes the economy work better. It means less traffic congestion, safer roads, and 
How high should the tax on gasoline be? Most European countries impose gas-
oline taxes that are much higher than those in the United States. Many observers 
have suggested that the United States should also tax gasoline more heavily. A 
2007 study published in the Journal of Economic Literature summarized the research 
on the size of the various externalities associated with driving. It concluded that 
the optimal corrective tax on gasoline was $2.28 per gallon in 2005 dollars; af-
ter adjusting for inflation, that amount is equivalent to about $2.78 per gallon in 
2015 dollars. By contrast, the actual tax in the United States in 2015 was only about 
The tax revenue from a gasoline tax could be used to lower taxes that distort 
incentives and cause deadweight losses, such as income taxes. In addition, some of 
the burdensome government regulations that require automakers to produce more 
fuel-efficient cars would prove unnecessar
--- PAGE 228 ---
CHAPTER 10   EXTERNALITIES
Many policy analysts believe that taxing 
carbon is the best approach to dealing 
with global climate change.
The Most Sensible Tax of All
By Yoram Bauman and Shi-Ling Hsu
n Sunday, the best climate policy in the 
world got even better: British Columbia’s 
carbon tax—a tax on the carbon content of all 
fossil fuels burned in the province—increased 
from $25 to $30 per metric ton of carbon diox-
ide, making it more expensive to pollute. 
This was good news not only for the 
 environment but for nearly everyone who pays 
taxes in British Columbia, because the carbon 
tax is used to reduce taxes for individuals and 
businesses. Thanks to this tax swap, British 
Columbia has lowered its corporate income tax 
rate to 10 percent from 12 percent, a rate that 
is among the lowest in the Group of 8 wealthy 
nations. Personal income taxes for people earn-
ing less than $119,000 per year are now the low-
est in Canada, and there are targeted  rebates 
for low-income and rural households. 
The only bad news is that this is the last 
increase scheduled in British Columbia. In our 
view, the reason is simple: the province is wait-
ing for the rest of North America to catch up so 
that its tax system will not become unbalanced 
or put energy-intensive industries at a competi-
The United States should jump at the chance 
to adopt a similar revenue-neutral tax swap. It’s 
an opportunity to reduce existing taxes, clean up 
the environment and increase personal freedom 
Let’s start with the economics. Substituting 
a carbon tax for some of our current taxes—on 
payr
--- PAGE 229 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
10-2c  Market-Based Policy 2: Tradable  
Returning to our example of the paper mill and the steel mill, 
let us suppose that, despite the advice of its economists, the EPA 
adopts the regulation and requires each factory to reduce its pol-
lution to 300 tons of glop per year. Then one day, after the regu-
lation is in place and both mills have complied, the two firms go 
to the EPA with a proposal. The steel mill wants to increase its 
emission of glop from 300 to 400 tons. The paper mill has agreed 
to reduce its emission from 300 to 200 tons if the steel mill pays it 
$5 million. The total emission of glop would remain at 600 tons. 
Should the EPA allow the two factories to make this deal?
From the standpoint of economic efficiency, allowing the deal 
is good policy. The deal must make the owners of the two facto-
ries better off because they are voluntarily agreeing to it. More-
over, the deal does not have any external effects because the 
total amount of pollution stays the same. Thus, social welfare is 
enhanced by allowing the paper mill to sell its pollution rights to 
The same logic applies to any voluntary transfer of the right to 
pollute from one firm to another. If the EPA allows firms to make 
these deals, it will, in essence, create a new scarce resource: pol-
lution permits. A market to trade these permits will eventually 
 develop, and that market will be governed by the forces of supply 
and demand. The invisible hand will ensure that this new market 
allocates the right to pollute efficiently. That is, the perm
--- PAGE 230 ---
CHAPTER 10   EXTERNALITIES
This curve shows that the lower the price of polluting, the more firms will choose 
to pollute. In panel (a), the EPA uses a corrective tax to set a price for pollution. 
In this case, the supply curve for pollution rights is perfectly elastic (because 
firms can pollute as much as they want by paying the tax), and the position of the 
demand curve determines the quantity of pollution. In panel (b), the EPA sets a 
quantity of pollution by issuing pollution permits. In this case, the supply curve 
for pollution rights is perfectly inelastic (because the quantity of pollution is fixed 
by the number of permits), and the position of the demand curve determines the 
price of pollution. Hence, the EPA can achieve any point on a given demand curve 
either by setting a price with a corrective tax or by setting a quantity with pollu-
In some circumstances, however, selling pollution permits may be better than 
levying a corrective tax. Suppose the EPA wants no more than 600 tons of glop 
dumped into the river. But because the EPA does not know the demand curve 
for pollution, it is not sure what size tax would achieve that goal. In this case, it 
can simply auction off 600 pollution permits. The auction price would yield the 
appropriate size of the corrective tax.
The idea of the government auctioning off the right to pollute may at first 
sound like a creature of some economist’s imagination. And in fact, that is how 
the idea began. But increasingly, the EPA has used this system as a way to control 
pollution. A notable success story has been the case
--- PAGE 231 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
set up a system that allowed plants to trade their SO2 allowances. Initially, both 
industry representatives and environmentalists were skeptical of the proposal, 
but over time the system reduced pollution with minimal disruption. Pollution 
permits, like corrective taxes, are now widely viewed as a cost-effective way to 
keep the environment clean.
10-2d Objections to the Economic Analysis of Pollution
“We cannot give anyone the option of polluting for a fee.” This comment from the 
late Senator Edmund Muskie reflects the view of some environmentalists. Clean 
air and clean water, they argue, are fundamental human rights that should not 
be debased by considering them in economic terms. How can you put a price on 
clean air and clean water? The environment is so important, they claim, that we 
should protect it as much as possible, regardless of the cost.
Economists have little sympathy for this type of argument. To economists, good 
environmental policy begins by acknowledging the first of the Ten  Principles of 
Economics in Chapter 1: People face trade-offs. Certainly, clean air and clean  water 
have value. But their value must be compared to their opportunity cost—that is, 
to what one must give up to obtain them. Eliminating all pollution is impossi-
ble. Trying to eliminate all pollution would reverse many of the technological 
advances that allow us to enjoy a high standard of living. Few people would be 
willing to accept poor nutrition, inadequate medical care, or shoddy housing to 
make the environment as clean as po
--- PAGE 232 ---
CHAPTER 10   EXTERNALITIES
Another private solution to externalities involves charities. For example, the 
Sierra Club, whose goal is to protect the environment, is a nonprofit organiza-
tion funded with private donations. As another example, colleges and universities 
receive gifts from alumni, corporations, and foundations in part because educa-
tion has positive externalities for society. The government encourages this private 
solution to externalities through the tax system by allowing an income tax deduc-
tion for charitable donations.
The private market can often solve the problem of externalities by relying on 
the self-interest of the relevant parties. Sometimes the solution takes the form of 
integrating different types of businesses. For example, consider an apple grower 
and a beekeeper who are located next to each other. Each business confers a posi-
tive externality on the other: By pollinating the flowers on the trees, the bees help 
the orchard produce apples, while the bees use the nectar they get from the  apple 
trees to produce honey. Nonetheless, when the apple grower is deciding how 
many trees to plant and the beekeeper is deciding how many bees to keep, they 
neglect the positive externality. As a result, the apple grower plants too few trees 
and the beekeeper keeps too few bees. These externalities could be internalized 
if the beekeeper bought the apple orchard or if the apple grower bought the bee-
hives: Both activities would then take place within the same firm, and this single 
firm could choose the optimal number of trees and bees. Internaliz
--- PAGE 233 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
bears an $800 cost from the barking. In this case, Jane can offer Dick $600 to get rid 
of the dog, and Dick will gladly accept. Both parties are better off than they were 
before, and the efficient outcome is reached.
It is possible, of course, that Jane would not be willing to offer any price that 
Dick would accept. For instance, suppose that Dick gets a $1,000 benefit from the 
dog and Jane bears an $800 cost from the barking. In this case, Dick would turn 
down any offer below $1,000, while Jane would not offer any amount above $800. 
Therefore, Dick ends up keeping the dog. Given these costs and benefits, how-
ever, this outcome is efficient.
So far, we have assumed that Dick has the legal right to keep a barking dog. 
In other words, we have assumed that Dick can keep Spot unless Jane pays him 
enough to induce him to give up the dog voluntarily. But how different would the 
outcome be if Jane had the legal right to peace and quiet?
According to the Coase theorem, the initial distribution of rights does not mat-
ter for the market’s ability to reach the efficient outcome. For instance, suppose 
that Jane can legally compel Dick to get rid of the dog. Having this right works to 
Jane’s advantage, but it probably will not change the outcome. In this case, Dick 
can offer to pay Jane to allow him to keep the dog. If the benefit of the dog to Dick 
exceeds the cost of the barking to Jane, then Dick and Jane will strike a bargain in 
Although Dick and Jane can reach the efficient outcome regardless of how 
rights are initially 
--- PAGE 234 ---
CHAPTER 10   EXTERNALITIES
Whenever people come in close contact, 
Don’t Want Me to Recline My  
Airline Seat? You Can Pay Me
fly a lot. When I fly, I recline. I don’t feel guilty 
about it. And I’m going to keep doing it, unless 
I bring this up because of a dispute you 
may have heard about: On Sunday, a United 
Airlines flight from Newark to Denver made an 
unscheduled stop in Chicago to discharge two 
passengers who had a dispute over seat reclin-
ing. According to The Associated Press, a man 
in a middle seat installed the Knee Defender, a 
$21.95 device that keeps a seat upright, on the 
A flight attendant asked him to remove the 
device. He refused. The woman seated in front of 
him turned around and threw water at him. The 
pilot landed the plane and booted both passen-
Obviously, it’s improper to throw water 
at another passenger on a flight, even if he 
 deserves it. But I’ve seen a distressing amount 
of sympathy for Mr. Knee Defender, who wasn’t 
just instigating a fight but usurping his fellow 
passenger’s property rights. When you buy an 
airline ticket, one of the things you’re buying is 
the right to use your seat’s reclining function. If 
this passenger so badly wanted the passenger 
in front of him not to recline, he should have 
paid her to give up that right.
I wrote an article to that effect in 2011, not-
ing that airline seats are an excellent case study 
for the Coase Theorem. This is an economic theory 
holding that it doesn’t matter very much who is ini-
tially given a property right; so long as you clearly 
define it and transaction costs are low, 
--- PAGE 235 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
however, trying to coordinate them all to bargain with the factory may be almost 
When private bargaining does not work, the government can sometimes play a 
role. The government is an institution designed for collective action. In this exam-
ple, the government can act on behalf of the fishermen, even when it is impracti-
cal for the fishermen to act for themselves.
Give an example of a private solution to an externality. t What is the 
Coase theorem? t Why are private economic participants sometimes 
unable to solve the problems caused by an externality? 
The invisible hand is powerful but not omnipotent. A market’s equilibrium maxi-
mizes the sum of producer and consumer surplus. When the buyers and sellers in 
the market are the only interested parties, this outcome is efficient from the stand-
point of society as a whole. But when there are external effects, such as pollution, 
evaluating a market outcome requires taking into account the well-being of third 
parties as well. In this case, the invisible hand of the marketplace may fail to allo-
cate resources efficiently.
In some cases, people can solve the problem of externalities on their own. The 
Coase theorem suggests that the interested parties can bargain among themselves 
and agree on an efficient solution. Sometimes, however, an efficient outcome can-
not be reached, perhaps because the large number of interested parties makes bar-
When people cannot solve the problem of externalities privately, the govern-
ment often steps in. Yet even with government intervention, 
--- PAGE 236 ---
CHAPTER 10   EXTERNALITIES
3. When the government levies a tax on a good equal 
to the external cost associated with the good’s 
production, it ________ the price paid by consumers 
and makes the market outcome ________ efficient.
4. Which of the following statements about corrective 
taxes is generally NOT true?
a. Economists prefer them to command-and-control 
b. They raise government revenue.
c. They cause deadweight losses.
d. They reduce the quantity sold in a market.
5. The government auctions off 500 units of pollution 
rights. They sell for $50 per unit, raising total revenue 
of $25,000. This policy is equivalent to a corrective 
tax of _____ per unit of pollution.
6. The Coase theorem does NOT apply if
a. there is a significant externality between two 
b. the court system vigorously enforces all contracts.
c. transaction costs make negotiating difficult.
d. both parties understand the externality fully.
r When a transaction between a buyer and seller directly 
affects a third party, the effect is called an external-
ity. If an activity yields negative externalities, such as 
pollution, the socially optimal quantity in a market is 
less than the equilibrium quantity. If an activity yields 
positive externalities, such as technology spillovers, 
the  socially optimal quantity is greater than the equi-
r Governments pursue various policies to remedy the 
inefficiencies caused by externalities. Sometimes the 
government prevents socially inefficient activity by 
regulating behavior. Other times it internalizes an ex-
ternality using corrective taxes. Another public 
--- PAGE 237 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
5. List some of the ways that the problems caused by 
externalities can be solved without government 
6. Imagine that you are a nonsmoker sharing a room 
with a smoker. According to the Coase theorem,  
what determines whether your roommate smokes in 
the room? Is this outcome efficient? How do you and 
your roommate reach this solution?
1. Consider two ways to protect your car from theft. The 
Club (a steering wheel lock) makes it difficult for a 
car thief to take your car. Lojack (a tracking system) 
makes it easier for the police to catch the car thief who 
has stolen it. Which of these methods conveys a nega-
tive externality on other car owners? Which conveys a 
positive externality? Do you think there are any policy 
implications of your analysis?
2. Consider the market for fire extinguishers.
a. Why might fire extinguishers exhibit positive 
b. Draw a graph of the market for fire extinguishers, 
labeling the demand curve, the social-value curve, 
the supply curve, and the social-cost curve.
c. Indicate the market equilibrium level of output 
and the efficient level of output. Give an intuitive 
explanation for why these quantities differ. 
d. If the external benefit is $10 per extinguisher, 
 describe a government policy that would yield the 
3. Greater consumption of alcohol leads to more motor 
vehicle accidents and, thus, imposes costs on people 
who do not drink and drive.
a. Illustrate the market for alcohol, labeling the 
 demand curve, the social-value curve, the supply 
curve, the social-cost curve, the market equ
--- PAGE 238 ---
CHAPTER 10   EXTERNALITIES
how might Bruno and Placido reach an efficient 
outcome on their own? What might prevent them 
from reaching an efficient outcome?
7. Figure 4 shows that for any given demand curve 
for the right to pollute, the government can achieve 
the same outcome either by setting a price with a 
corrective tax or by setting a quantity with pollution 
permits. Suppose there is a sharp improvement in the 
technology for controlling pollution.
a. Using graphs similar to those in Figure 4, illus-
trate the effect of this development on the demand 
b. What is the effect on the price and quantity of  
pollution under each regulatory system? Explain.
8. Suppose that the government decides to issue tradable 
permits for a certain form of pollution.
a. Does it matter for economic efficiency whether the 
government distributes or auctions the permits? 
b. If the government chooses to distribute the  
permits, does the allocation of permits among 
firms matter for efficiency? Explain.
9. There are three industrial firms in Happy Valley.
 The government wants to reduce pollution to 60 units, 
so it gives each firm 20 tradable pollution permits.
a. Who sells permits and how many do they sell? 
Who buys permits and how many do they buy? 
Briefly explain why the sellers and buyers are 
each willing to do so. What is the total cost of  
pollution reduction in this situation?
b. How much higher would the costs of pollution  
reduction be if the permits could not be traded?
--- PAGE 239 ---

--- PAGE 240 ---
n old song lyric maintains that “the best things in life are free.” A moment’s 
thought reveals a long list of goods that the songwriter could have had in 
mind. Nature provides some of them, such as rivers, mountains, beaches, 
lakes, and oceans. The government provides others, such as playgrounds, parks, 
and parades. In each case, people often do not pay a fee when they choose to 
 enjoy the benefit of the good.
Goods without prices provide a special challenge for economic analysis. Most 
goods in our economy are allocated through markets, in which buyers pay for 
what they receive and sellers are paid for what they provide. For these goods, 
--- PAGE 241 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
prices are the signals that guide the decisions of buyers and sellers, and these 
decisions lead to an efficient allocation of resources. When goods are available 
free of charge, however, the market forces that normally allocate resources in our 
In this chapter, we examine the problems that arise for the allocation of 
 resources when there are goods without market prices. Our analysis will shed 
light on one of the Ten Principles of Economics in Chapter 1: Governments can some-
times improve market outcomes. When a good does not have a price attached 
to it, private markets cannot ensure that the good is produced and consumed in 
the proper amounts. In such cases, government policy can potentially remedy the 
market failure and increase economic well-being.
11-1 The Different Kinds of Goods
How well do markets work in providing the goods that people want? The  answer 
to this question depends on the good being considered. As we discussed in 
 Chapter 7, a market can provide the efficient number of ice-cream cones: The price 
of ice-cream cones adjusts to balance supply and demand, and this equilibrium 
maximizes the sum of producer and consumer surplus. Yet as we discussed in 
Chapter 10, the market cannot be counted on to prevent aluminum manufacturers 
from polluting the air we breathe: Buyers and sellers in a market typically do not 
take into account the external effects of their decisions. Thus, markets work well if 
the good is ice cream, but they don’t if the good is clean air. 
When thinking about the various goods in 
--- PAGE 242 ---
CHAPTER 11   PUBLIC GOODS AND COMMON RESOURCES 
Goods can be grouped into four 
categories according to two 
characteristics: (1) A good is 
excludable if people can be pre-
vented from using it. (2) A good 
is rival in consumption if one 
person’s use of the good dimin-
ishes other people’s use of it. 
This diagram gives examples of 
• Uncongested nontoll roads
3. Common resources are rival in consumption but not excludable. For example, 
fish in the ocean are rival in consumption: When one person catches fish, there are 
fewer fish for the next person to catch. But these fish are not an excludable good 
because it is difficult to stop fishermen from taking fish out of a vast ocean.
 4. Club goods are excludable but not rival in consumption. For instance, consider 
fire protection in a small town. It is easy to exclude someone from using this 
good: The fire department can just let her house burn down. But fire protection 
is not rival in consumption: Once a town has paid for the fire department, the 
additional cost of protecting one more house is small. (We discuss club goods 
again in Chapter 15, where we see that they are one type of a natural monopoly.)
Although Figure 1 offers a clean separation of goods into four categories, 
the boundaries between the categories are sometimes fuzzy. Whether goods are 
 excludable or rival in consumption is often a matter of degree. Fish in an ocean 
may not be excludable because monitoring fishing is so difficult, but a large 
enough coast guard could make fish at least partly excludable. Similarly, although 
fish are generally riv
--- PAGE 243 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
To understand how public goods differ from other goods and why they present 
problems for society, let’s consider an example: a fireworks display. This good is 
not excludable because it is impossible to prevent someone from seeing fireworks, 
and it is not rival in consumption because one person’s enjoyment of fireworks 
does not reduce anyone else’s enjoyment of them. 
11-2a The Free-Rider Problem
The citizens of Smalltown, U.S.A., like seeing fireworks on the Fourth of July. 
Each of the town’s 500 residents places a $10 value on the experience for a total 
benefit of $5,000. The cost of putting on a fireworks display is $1,000. Because the 
$5,000 benefit exceeds the $1,000 cost, it is efficient for Smalltown to have a fire-
works display on the Fourth of July.
Would the private market produce the efficient outcome? Probably not. Imag-
ine that Ella, a Smalltown entrepreneur, decided to put on a fireworks display. 
Ella would surely have trouble selling tickets to the event because her potential 
customers would quickly figure out that they could see the fireworks even with-
out a ticket. Because fireworks are not excludable, people have an incentive to be 
free riders. A free rider is a person who receives the benefit of a good but does not 
pay for it. Because people would have an incentive to be free riders rather than 
ticket buyers, the market would fail to provide the efficient outcome.
One way to view this market failure is that it arises because of an externality. If 
Ella puts on the fireworks display, she confers an
--- PAGE 244 ---
CHAPTER 11   PUBLIC GOODS AND COMMON RESOURCES 
person enjoys the benefit of national defense, she does not reduce the ben-
efit to anyone else. Thus, national defense is neither excludable nor rival 
National defense is also one of the most expensive public goods. In 
2014, the U.S. federal government spent a total of $748 billion on national 
defense, more than $2,346 per person. People disagree about whether this 
amount is too small or too large, but almost no one doubts that some gov-
ernment spending for national defense is necessary. Even economists who 
advocate small government agree that national defense is a public good 
the government should provide.
Basic Research  Knowledge is created through research. In evaluating 
the appropriate public policy toward knowledge creation, it is important 
to distinguish general knowledge from specific technological knowledge. Spe-
cific technological knowledge, such as the invention of a longer-lasting battery, 
a smaller microchip, or a better digital music player, can be patented. The pat-
ent gives the inventor the exclusive right to the knowledge she has created for a 
 period of time. Anyone else who wants to use the patented information must pay 
the inventor for the right to do so. In other words, the patent makes the knowl-
edge created by the inventor excludable. 
By contrast, general knowledge is a public good. For example, a mathema-
tician cannot patent a theorem. Once a theorem is proven, the knowledge is 
not excludable: The theorem enters society’s general pool of knowledge that 
anyone can use without charge. 
--- PAGE 245 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
Economists disagree among themselves about what role the government should 
play in fighting poverty. We discuss this debate more fully in Chapter 20, but here we 
note one important argument: Advocates of antipoverty programs claim that fighting 
poverty is a public good. Even if everyone prefers living in a society without poverty, 
fighting poverty is not a “good” that private actions will adequately provide.
To see why, suppose someone tried to organize a group of wealthy individuals 
to try to eliminate poverty. They would be providing a public good. This good 
would not be rival in consumption: One person’s enjoyment of living in a society 
without poverty would not reduce anyone else’s enjoyment of it. The good would 
not be excludable: Once poverty is eliminated, no one can be prevented from tak-
ing pleasure in this fact. As a result, there would be a tendency for people to free 
ride on the generosity of others, enjoying the benefits of poverty elimination with-
out contributing to the cause.
Because of the free-rider problem, eliminating poverty through private charity will 
probably not work. Yet government action can solve this problem. Taxing the wealthy 
to raise the living standards of the poor can potentially make everyone better off. The 
poor are better off because they now enjoy a higher standard of living, and those pay-
ing the taxes are better off because they enjoy living in a society with less poverty.
ARE LIGHTHOUSES PUBLIC GOODS?
Some goods can switch between being public goods and being private 
goods 
--- PAGE 246 ---
CHAPTER 11   PUBLIC GOODS AND COMMON RESOURCES 
first step. The government must then determine what kinds of public goods to 
provide and in what quantities. 
Suppose that the government is considering a public project, such as building 
a new highway. To judge whether to build the highway, it must compare the total 
benefits for all those who would use it to the costs of building and maintaining it. 
To make this decision, the government might hire a team of economists and engi-
neers to conduct a study, called a cost–benefit analysis, to estimate the total costs 
and benefits of the project to society as a whole.
Cost–benefit analysts have a tough job. Because the highway will be available 
to everyone free of charge, there is no price with which to judge the value of the 
highway. Simply asking people how much they would value the highway is not 
reliable: Quantifying benefits is difficult using the results from a questionnaire, 
and respondents have little incentive to tell the truth. Those who would use the 
highway have an incentive to exaggerate the benefit they receive to get the high-
way built. Those who would be harmed by the highway have an incentive to 
 exaggerate the costs to them to prevent the highway from being built.
The efficient provision of public goods is, therefore, intrinsically more difficult 
than the efficient provision of private goods. When buyers of a private good  enter 
a market, they reveal the value they place on it through the prices they are will-
ing to pay. At the same time, sellers reveal their costs with the prices they are 
willing 
--- PAGE 247 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
courts to award damages in wrongful-death suits, is to look at the total amount of 
money a person would have earned if she had lived. Economists are often critical of 
this approach because it ignores other opportunity costs of losing one’s life. It thus 
has the bizarre implication that the life of a retired or disabled person has no value.
A better way to value human life is to look at the risks that people are volun-
tarily willing to take and how much they must be paid for taking them. For exam-
ple, mortality risk varies across jobs. Construction workers in high-rise buildings 
face greater risk of death on the job than office workers do. By comparing wages in 
risky and less risky occupations, controlling for education, experience, and other 
determinants of wages, economists can get some sense about what value people 
put on their own lives. Studies using this approach conclude that the value of a 
human life is about $10 million.
We can now return to our original example and respond to the town engineer. The 
traffic light reduces the risk of fatality by 0.5 percentage points. Thus, the expected 
benefit from installing the traffic light is 0.005 3 $10 million, or $50,000. This estimate 
of the benefit exceeds the cost of $10,000, so you should approve the project. ●
What is the free-rider problem? Why does the free-rider problem induce 
the government to provide public goods? • How should the government 
decide whether to provide a public good?
Common resources, like public goods, are not excludable: They are available 
--- PAGE 248 ---
CHAPTER 11   PUBLIC GOODS AND COMMON RESOURCES 
What causes the tragedy? Why do the shepherds allow the sheep population 
to grow so large that it destroys the Town Common? The reason is that social and 
private incentives differ. Avoiding the destruction of the grazing land depends on 
the collective action of the shepherds. If the shepherds acted together, they could 
reduce the sheep population to a size that the Town Common can support. Yet 
no single family has an incentive to reduce the size of its own flock because each 
flock represents only a small part of the problem.
In essence, the Tragedy of the Commons arises because of an externality. When 
one family’s flock grazes on the common land, it reduces the quality of the land 
available for other families. Because people neglect this negative externality when 
deciding how many sheep to own, the result is an excessive number of sheep. 
If the tragedy had been foreseen, the town could have solved the problem in 
various ways. It could have regulated the number of sheep in each family’s flock, 
internalized the externality by taxing sheep, or auctioned off a limited number of 
sheep-grazing permits. That is, the medieval town could have dealt with the problem 
of overgrazing in the way that modern society deals with the problem of pollution.
In the case of land, however, there is a simpler solution. The town can divide 
the land among town families. Each family can enclose its parcel of land with a 
fence and then protect it from excessive grazing. In this way, the land becomes 
a private good rather than a common re
--- PAGE 249 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
Many economists think drivers should 
be charged more for using roads. Here 
Why You’ll Love Paying for 
Roads That Used to Be Free
o end the scourge of traffic congestion, 
the streets of Rome during daylight hours. 
It didn’t work—traffic jams just shifted to 
dusk. Two thousand years later, we have 
put a man on the moon and developed gar-
ments infinitely more practical than the 
toga, but we seem little nearer to solving 
If you live in a city, particularly a large 
one, you probably need little convincing that 
traffic congestion is frustrating and wasteful. 
According to the Texas Transportation Insti-
tute, the average American urban traveler 
lost 38 hours, nearly one full work week, to 
congestion in 2005. And congestion is getting 
worse, not better; urban travelers in 1982 
were delayed only 14 hours that year. 
Americans want action, but unfortunately 
there aren’t too many great ideas about what that 
action might be. As Anthony Downs’s excellent 
book Still Stuck in Traffic: Coping With Peak-Hour 
Traffic  Congestion chronicles, most of the proposed 
solutions are too difficult to implement, won’t work, 
Fortunately, there is one remedy which is 
both doable and largely guaranteed to suc-
ceed. In the space of a year or two we could 
have you zipping along the 405 or the LIE 
at the height of rush hour at a comfortable 
There’s just one small problem with this 
silver bullet for congestion: many people 
seem to prefer the werewolf. Despite its mer-
its, this policy, which is known as “congestion 
pricing,” “value p
--- PAGE 250 ---
CHAPTER 11   PUBLIC GOODS AND COMMON RESOURCES 
and time needed to acquire the good. Think of 
Soviet shoppers spending their lives in end-
less queues to purchase artificially low-priced 
but exceedingly scarce goods. Then think of 
Americans who can fulfill nearly any consum-
erist fantasy quickly but at a monetary cost. 
Free but congested roads have left us shiver-
ing on the streets of Moscow.
To consider it another way, delay is an 
externality imposed by drivers on their peers. 
By driving onto a busy road and contribut-
ing to congestion, drivers slow the speeds of 
others—but they never have to pay for it, at 
least not directly. In the end, of course, every-
body pays, because as we impose congestion 
on others, others impose it on us. This degen-
erates into a game that nobody can win.
Markets work best when externalities 
are internalized: i.e., you pay for the hassle 
you inflict on others…. Using tolls to help 
internalize the congestion externality would 
somewhat reduce the number of trips made 
on the most congested roads at the peak 
 usage periods; some trips would be moved to 
less congested times and routes, and others 
would be foregone entirely. This way we would 
cut down on the congestion costs we impose 
Granted, tolls cannot fully cope with 
 accidents and other incidents, which are 
 major causes of delay. But pricing can largely 
eliminate chronic, recurring congestion. No 
matter how high the demand for a road, there 
is a level of toll that will keep it flowing freely. 
To make tolling truly effective, the price 
must be right. Too high a pric
--- PAGE 251 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
to maintain the species for the next year. Just as excessive grazing can destroy the 
Town Common, excessive fishing and whaling can destroy commercially valu-
Oceans remain one of the least regulated common resources. Two problems 
prevent an easy solution. First, many countries have access to the oceans, so any 
solution would require international cooperation among countries that hold dif-
ferent values. Second, because the oceans are so vast, enforcing any agreement is 
difficult. As a result, fishing rights have been a frequent source of international 
tension among normally friendly countries.
Within the United States, various laws aim to manage the use of fish and other 
wildlife. For example, the government charges for fishing and hunting licenses, 
and it restricts the lengths of the fishing and hunting seasons. Fishermen are often 
required to throw back small fish, and hunters can kill only a limited number of 
animals. All these laws reduce the use of a common resource and help maintain 
WHY THE COW IS NOT EXTINCT 
Throughout history, many species of animals have been threatened 
with extinction. When Europeans first arrived in North America, 
more than 60 million buffalo roamed the continent.  Unfortunately, 
however, hunting the buffalo was so popular during the 19th century that by 1900 
the animal’s population had fallen to about 400 before the government stepped 
in to protect the species. In some African countries today, elephants face a similar 
challenge, as poachers kill them for the ivory in their tusks.
Yet
--- PAGE 252 ---
CHAPTER 11   PUBLIC GOODS AND COMMON RESOURCES 
11-4  Conclusion: The Importance  
In this and the previous chapter, we have seen there are some “goods” that 
the market does not provide adequately. Markets do not ensure that the air we 
breathe is clean or that our country is defended from foreign aggressors. Instead, 
societies rely on the government to protect the environment and to provide for the 
The problems we considered in these chapters arise in many different markets, 
but they share a common theme. In all cases, the market fails to allocate resources 
efficiently because property rights are not well established. That is, some item of 
value does not have an owner with the legal authority to control it. For example, 
although no one doubts that the “good” of clean air or national defense is valu-
able, no one has the right to attach a price to it and profit from its use. A factory 
pollutes too much because no one charges the factory for the pollution it emits. 
The market does not provide for national defense because no one can charge 
those who are defended for the benefit they receive.
When the absence of property rights causes a market failure, the government 
can potentially solve the problem. Sometimes, as in the sale of pollution permits, 
the solution is for the government to help define property rights and thereby 
 unleash market forces. Other times, as in restricted hunting seasons, the solution 
is for the government to regulate private behavior. Still other times, as in the pro-
vision of national defense, the solution is for the government to use ta
--- PAGE 253 ---
• Goods differ in whether they are excludable and 
whether they are rival in consumption. A good is 
 excludable if it is possible to prevent someone from 
 using it. A good is rival in consumption if one person’s 
use of the good reduces others’ ability to use the same 
unit of the good. Markets work best for private goods, 
which are both excludable and rival in consumption. 
Markets do not work as well for other types of goods.
• Public goods are neither rival in consumption nor 
 excludable. Examples of public goods include 
 fireworks displays, national defense, and the  discovery 
of fundamental knowledge. Because people are not 
charged for their use of the public good, they have 
an incentive to free ride, making private provision of 
the good untenable. Therefore, governments provide 
 public goods, basing their decision about the quantity 
of each good on cost–benefit analysis.
• Common resources are rival in consumption but not 
excludable. Examples include common grazing land, 
clean air, and congested roads. Because people are not 
charged for their use of common resources, they tend 
to use them excessively. Therefore, governments use 
various methods, such as regulations and corrective 
taxes, to limit the use of common resources.
rivalry in consumption, p. 212
cost–benefit analysis, p. 217
Tragedy of the Commons, p. 218
1. Explain what is meant by a good being “excludable.” 
Explain what is meant by a good being “rival in con-
sumption.” Is a slice of pizza excludable? Is it rival in 
2. Define and give an example of a public good. Can the 
private market pr
--- PAGE 254 ---
CHAPTER 11   PUBLIC GOODS AND COMMON RESOURCES 
4. Wireless, high-speed Internet is provided for free in 
the airport of the city of Communityville.
a. At first, only a few people use the service. What 
type of a good is this and why?
b. Eventually, as more people find out about the 
service and start using it, the speed of the connec-
tion begins to fall. Now what type of a good is the 
wireless Internet service? 
c. What problem might result and why? What is one 
possible way to correct this problem?
5. Four roommates are planning to spend the weekend 
in their dorm room watching old movies, and they are 
debating how many to watch. Here is their willingness 
a. Within the dorm room, is the showing of a movie 
a public good? Why or why not?
b. If it costs $8 to rent a movie, how many movies should 
the roommates rent to maximize total surplus?
c. If they choose the optimal number from part (b) 
and then split the cost of renting the movies 
equally, how much surplus does each person 
obtain from watching the movies?
d. Is there any way to split the cost to ensure that 
everyone benefits? What practical problems does 
e. Suppose they agree in advance to choose the ef-
ficient number and to split the cost of the movies 
equally. When Steven is asked his willingness to 
pay, will he have an incentive to tell the truth? If 
so, why? If not, what will he be tempted to say?
f. What does this example teach you about the opti-
mal provision of public goods?
6. Some economists argue that private firms will not 
undertake the efficient amount of basic scientific 
a. Explain why thi
--- PAGE 255 ---

--- PAGE 256 ---
The Design of the Tax System
l “Scarface” Capone, the notorious 1920s gangster and crime boss, was never 
convicted for his many violent crimes. Yet, eventually, he did go to jail—for 
tax evasion. He had neglected to heed Ben Franklin’s observation that “in this 
world nothing is certain but death and taxes.”
When Franklin made this claim in 1789, the average American paid less than 
5  percent of his income in taxes, and that remained true for the next hundred years. 
Over the course of the 20th century, however, taxes became ever more important in 
the life of the typical U.S. citizen. Today, all taxes taken together—including personal 
income taxes, corporate income taxes, payroll taxes, sales taxes, and property 
taxes—use up more than a quarter of the average American’s income. 
In many European countries, the tax bite is even larger.
--- PAGE 257 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
Taxes are inevitable because citizens expect their governments to provide 
them with various goods and services. One of the Ten Principles of Economics from 
 Chapter 1 is that markets are usually a good way to organize economic activity. 
But market economies rely on property rights and the rule of law, and so the gov-
ernment provides police and courts. Another of the Ten Principles of Economics is 
that the government can sometimes improve market outcomes. When the govern-
ment remedies an externality (such as air pollution), provides a public good (such 
as national defense), or regulates the use of a common resource (such as fish in a 
public lake), it can raise economic well-being. But these activities can be costly. 
For the government to perform these and its many other functions, it needs to 
raise revenue through taxation.
We began our study of taxation in earlier chapters, where we saw how a 
tax on a good affects the supply and demand for that good. In Chapter 6, we 
saw that a tax reduces the quantity sold in a market, and we examined how 
the burden of a tax is shared by buyers and sellers depending on the elasticities 
of supply and demand. In Chapter 8, we examined how taxes affect economic 
well-being. We learned that taxes can cause deadweight losses: The reduction in 
consumer and producer surplus resulting from a tax exceeds the revenue raised 
In this chapter, we build on these lessons to discuss the design of a tax system. 
We begin with some basic facts about how the U.S. government raises money. We 
then d
--- PAGE 258 ---
CHAPTER 12   THE DESIGN OF THE TAX SYSTEM
This figure shows revenue of the federal government and of state and local governments as a per-
centage of gross domestic product (GDP), which measures total income in the economy. It shows 
that the government plays a large role in the U.S. economy and that its role has grown over time.
Source: Historical Statistics of the United States; Bureau of Economic Analysis; and author’s calculations.
The percentage of income that governments take in taxes varies substantially from country to country.
Source: OECD. Data are for 2013.
--- PAGE 259 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis. 
Columns may not sum to total due to 
The Federal Income Tax Rates: 2014
This table shows the marginal tax rates for 
an unmarried taxpayer. The taxes owed by 
a taxpayer depend on all the marginal tax 
rates up to his income level. For example, 
a taxpayer with income of $25,000 pays 
10 percent of the first $9,075 of income, 
and then 15 percent of the rest.
Personal Income Taxes  The largest source of revenue for the federal govern-
ment is the personal income tax. As April 15 approaches each year, almost  every 
American family fills out a tax form to determine the income tax it owes the 
 government. Each family is required to report its income from all sources: wages 
from working, interest on savings, dividends from corporations in which it owns 
shares, profits from any small businesses it operates, and so on. The family’s tax 
liability (how much it owes) is based on its total income. 
A family’s income tax liability is not simply proportional to its income. Instead, 
the law requires a more complicated calculation. Taxable income is computed as 
total income minus an amount based on the number of dependents (primarily 
children) and minus certain expenses that policymakers have deemed “deduct-
ible” (such as mortgage interest payments, state and local tax payments, and 
charitable giving). Then the tax liability is calculated from taxable income using a 
schedule like the one shown in Table 2.
This table presents the marginal tax rate—the tax rate applied to each additional 
dollar o
--- PAGE 260 ---
CHAPTER 12   THE DESIGN OF THE TAX SYSTEM
workers. Table 1 calls this revenue social insurance taxes because the revenue from 
these taxes is mostly earmarked to pay for Social Security and Medicare. Social 
Security is an income-support program designed primarily to maintain the living 
standards of the elderly. Medicare is the government health program for the elderly. 
In 2014, the total payroll tax was 15.3 percent for annual earnings up to $117,000 
and 2.9 percent of earnings above $117,000, together with an additional 0.9 percent 
for taxpayers with high income (above $200,000 if single, $250,000 if married). For 
many middle-income households, the payroll tax is the largest tax they pay.
Corporate Income Taxes  Next in magnitude, but much smaller than either 
personal income taxes or social insurance taxes, is the corporate income tax. A 
corporation is a business set up to have its own legal existence, distinct and sepa-
rate from its owners. The government taxes each corporation based on its profit—
the amount the corporation receives for the goods or services it sells minus the 
costs of producing those goods or services. Notice that corporate profits are, in 
essence, taxed twice. They are taxed once by the corporate income tax when the 
corporation earns the profits, and they are taxed again by the personal income tax 
when the corporation uses its profits to pay dividends to its shareholders. In part 
to compensate for this double taxation, policymakers have decided to tax divi-
dend income at lower rates than other types of income: In 2014, the top marginal 

--- PAGE 261 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
at retail stores. Every time a customer buys something, he pays the storekeeper an 
extra amount that the storekeeper remits to the government. (Some states exclude 
certain items that are considered necessities, such as food and clothing.) Prop-
erty taxes are levied on property owners as a percentage of the estimated value of 
land and structures. Together, these two taxes make up more than 40 percent of all 
 receipts of state and local governments.
State and local governments also levy individual and corporate income taxes. 
In many cases, state and local income taxes are similar to federal income taxes. 
In other cases, they are quite different. For example, some states tax income from 
wages less heavily than income earned in the form of interest and dividends. 
Some states do not tax income at all.
State and local governments also receive substantial funds from the federal 
government. To some extent, the federal government’s policy of sharing its rev-
enue with state governments redistributes funds from high-income states (which 
pay more taxes) to low-income states (which receive more benefits). Often, these 
funds are tied to specific programs that the federal government wants to subsidize. 
For example, Medicaid provides healthcare for the poor; this program is managed 
by the states but much of the funding comes from the federal government.
Finally, state and local governments receive receipts from various sources 
 included in the “other” category in Table 3. These include fees for fishing and hunt-
ing licenses, tol
--- PAGE 262 ---
CHAPTER 12   THE DESIGN OF THE TAX SYSTEM
cream, people eat less ice cream and more frozen yogurt. If the government taxes 
housing, people live in smaller houses and spend more of their income on other 
things. If the government taxes labor earnings, people work less and enjoy more 
Because taxes distort incentives, they entail deadweight losses. As we first dis-
cussed in Chapter 8, the deadweight loss of a tax is the reduction in economic 
well-being of taxpayers in excess of the amount of revenue raised by the govern-
ment. The deadweight loss is the inefficiency that a tax creates as people allocate 
resources according to the tax incentive rather than the true costs and benefits of 
the goods and services that they buy and sell.
To recall how taxes cause deadweight losses, consider an example. Sup-
pose that Jake places an $8 value on a pizza and Jane places a $6 value on it. 
If there is no tax on pizza, the price of pizza will reflect the cost of making 
it. Let’s suppose that the price of pizza is $5, so both Jake and Jane choose to 
buy one. Both consumers get some surplus of value over the amount paid. 
Jake gets consumer surplus of $3, and Jane gets consumer surplus of $1. Total 
Now suppose that the government levies a $2 tax on pizza and the price of 
pizza rises to $7. (This occurs if supply is perfectly elastic.) Jake still buys a pizza, 
but now he has consumer surplus of only $1. Jane now decides not to buy a pizza 
because its price is higher than its value to her. The government collects tax reve-
nue of $2 on Jake’s pizza. Total consumer surplus has fal
--- PAGE 263 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
is later spent. This alternative system, called a consumption tax, would not distort 
people’s saving decisions. 
Various provisions of current law already make the tax system a bit like a con-
sumption tax. Taxpayers can put a limited amount of their income into special 
savings accounts, such as Individual Retirement Accounts and 401(k) plans, and 
this income and the accumulated interest it earns escape taxation until the money 
is withdrawn at retirement. For people who do most of their saving through these 
retirement accounts, their tax bill is, in effect, based on their consumption rather 
European countries tend to rely more on consumption taxes than does the 
United States. Most of them raise a significant amount of government revenue 
through a value-added tax, or a VAT. A VAT is like the retail sales tax that many 
U.S. states use. But rather than collecting all of the tax at the retail level when the 
consumer buys the final good, the government collects the tax in stages as the 
good is being produced (that is, as value is added by firms along the chain of 
Various U.S. policymakers have proposed that the tax code move further in 
the direction of taxing consumption rather than income. In 2005, economist Alan 
Greenspan, then Chairman of the Federal Reserve, offered this advice to a presi-
dential commission on tax reform: “As you know, many economists believe that 
a consumption tax would be best from the perspective of promoting economic 
growth—particularly if one were designing a tax system from scratch—because 

--- PAGE 264 ---
CHAPTER 12   THE DESIGN OF THE TAX SYSTEM
The resources devoted to complying with the tax laws are a type of deadweight 
loss. The government gets only the amount of taxes paid. By contrast, the tax-
payer loses not only this amount but also the time and money spent document-
ing, computing, and avoiding taxes.
The administrative burden of the tax system could be reduced by simplifying 
the tax laws. Yet simplification is often politically difficult. Most people are ready 
to simplify the tax code by eliminating the loopholes that benefit others, but few 
are eager to give up the loopholes that they benefit from themselves. In the end, 
the complexity of the tax law results from the political process as various taxpay-
ers with their own special interests lobby for their causes. 
12-2c Marginal Tax Rates versus Average Tax Rates
When discussing the efficiency and equity of income taxes, economists distin-
guish between two notions of the tax rate: the average and the marginal. The 
average tax rate is total taxes paid divided by total income. The marginal tax rate 
is the amount by which taxes increase from an additional dollar of income.
For example, suppose that the government taxes 20 percent of the first 
$50,000 of income and 50 percent of all income above $50,000. Under this tax, a 
person who makes $60,000 pays a tax of $15,000: 20 percent of the first $50,000 
(0.20 3 $50,000 5 $10,000) plus 50 percent of the remaining $10,000 (0.50 3 $10,000 5 
$5,000). For this person, the average tax rate is $15,000 / $60,000, or 25 percent. 
But the marginal tax rate is 50 perce
--- PAGE 265 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
and accountants, the lump-sum tax imposes a minimal administrative burden 
If lump-sum taxes are so efficient, why do we rarely observe them in the real 
world? The reason is that efficiency is only one goal of the tax system. A lump-sum 
tax would take the same amount from the poor and the rich, an outcome most 
people would view as unfair. To understand the tax systems that we  observe, we 
must therefore consider the other major goal of tax policy: equity.
What is meant by the efficiency of a tax system? • What can make a tax 
Ever since American colonists dumped imported tea into Boston harbor to protest 
high British taxes, tax policy has generated some of the most heated debates in 
American politics. The heat is rarely fueled by questions of efficiency. Instead, it 
arises from disagreements over how the tax burden should be distributed. Sena-
tor Russell Long once mimicked the public debate with this ditty:
Tax that fella behind the tree.
Of course, if we rely on the government to provide some of the goods and services 
we want, then someone must pay taxes to fund those goods and services. In this 
section, we consider the equity of a tax system. How should the burden of taxes 
be divided among the population? How do we evaluate whether a tax system is 
fair? Everyone agrees that the tax system should be equitable, but there is much 
disagreement about how to judge the equity of a tax system.
12-3a The Benefits Principle
One principle of taxation, called the benefits principle, states that people should 
pay taxes based o
--- PAGE 266 ---
CHAPTER 12   THE DESIGN OF THE TAX SYSTEM
The same argument can be used for many other public services, such as fire pro-
tection, national defense, and the court system.
It is even possible to use the benefits principle to argue for antipoverty pro-
grams funded by taxes on the wealthy. As we discussed in Chapter 11, people 
may prefer living in a society without poverty, suggesting that antipoverty pro-
grams are a public good. If the wealthy place a greater dollar value on this pub-
lic good than members of the middle class do, perhaps just because the wealthy 
have more to spend, then according to the benefits principle, they should be taxed 
more heavily to pay for these programs.
12-3b The Ability-to-Pay Principle
Another way to evaluate the equity of a tax system is called the ability-to-pay 
principle, which states that taxes should be levied on a person according to how 
well that person can shoulder the burden. This principle is sometimes justified by 
the claim that all citizens should make an “equal sacrifice” to support the govern-
ment. The magnitude of a person’s sacrifice, however, depends not only on the size 
of his tax payment but also on his income and other circumstances: A $1,000 tax paid 
by a poor person may require a larger sacrifice than a $10,000 tax paid by a rich one.
The ability-to-pay principle leads to two corollary notions of equity: vertical 
equity and horizontal equity. Vertical equity states that taxpayers with a greater 
ability to pay should contribute a larger amount. Horizontal equity states that 
taxpayers with similar abilities to 
--- PAGE 267 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
Source: Congressional Budget Office. Figures 
HOW THE TAX BURDEN IS DISTRIBUTED
The debate over tax policy often concerns whether the wealthy pay 
their fair share. There is no objective way to make this judgment. In 
evaluating the issue for yourself, however, it is useful to know how 
much families with different incomes pay under the current tax system.
Table 5 presents some data on how federal taxes are distributed among income 
classes. These figures are for 2011, the most recent year available as this book was 
going to press, and were tabulated by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO). 
They include all federal taxes—personal income taxes, payroll taxes, corporate 
income taxes, and excise taxes—but not state and local taxes. When calculating a 
household’s tax burden, the CBO allocates corporate income taxes to the owners 
of capital and payroll taxes to workers.
To construct the table, households are ranked according to their income and 
placed into five groups of equal size, called quintiles. The table also presents data 
on the richest 1 percent of Americans. The second column of the table shows the 
average income of each group. Income includes both market income (income that 
households have earned from their work and savings) and transfer payments 
from government programs, such as Social Security and welfare. The poorest one-
fifth of households had average income of $24,600, and the richest one-fifth had 
average income of $245,700. The richest 1 percent had average income of over $1.4 
The third column of the tab
--- PAGE 268 ---
CHAPTER 12   THE DESIGN OF THE TAX SYSTEM
The richest quintile of households still pays about one-quarter of its  income to 
the government, even after transfers are subtracted, and the top 1 percent still 
pays  almost 30  percent. By contrast, the average tax rate for the poorest quintile 
 becomes a sizeable negative number. That is, typical households in the bottom 
of the income distribution receive substantially more in transfers than they pay 
in taxes. The lesson is clear: To understand fully the progressivity of government 
policies, one must take into account both what people pay and what they receive.
Finally, it is worth noting that the numbers in Table 5 are a bit out of date. In 
late 2012, the U.S. Congress passed and President Obama signed a tax bill that 
 increased taxes significantly from those that prevailed previously, particularly for 
taxpayers at the top of the income distribution. As a result, the tax system in place 
for 2013 and beyond is more progressive than the one shown in the table. The Con-
gressional Budget Office projects that for the top 1 percent, taxes as a percentage of 
income increased from 29.0 to 33.3 percent. ●
Horizontal Equity  If taxes are based on ability to pay, then similar taxpayers 
should pay similar amounts of taxes. But what determines if two taxpayers are 
similar? Families differ in many ways. To evaluate whether a tax code is horizon-
tally equitable, one must determine which differences are relevant for a family’s 
ability to pay and which differences are not.
Suppose the Smith and Jones families each have income of
--- PAGE 269 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
WHO PAYS THE CORPORATE INCOME TAX?
The corporate income tax provides a good example of the importance 
of tax incidence for tax policy. The corporate tax is popular among 
voters. After all, corporations are not people. Voters are  always eager 
to get a tax cut and let some impersonal corporation pick up the tab.
But before deciding that the corporate income tax is a good way for the govern-
ment to raise revenue, we should consider who bears the burden of the  corporate 
tax. This is a difficult question on which economists disagree, but one thing is 
certain: People pay all taxes. When the government levies a tax on a corporation, 
the corporation is more like a tax collector than a taxpayer. The burden of the tax 
ultimately falls on people—the owners, customers, or workers of the corporation.
Many economists believe that workers and customers bear much of the burden 
of the corporate income tax. To see why, consider an example. Suppose that the 
U.S. government decides to raise the tax on the income earned by car companies. 
At first, this tax hurts the owners of the car companies, who receive less profit. 
Tax reformers and deficit hawks of-
ten suggest reducing the deductions, 
credits, and exclusions that narrow 
The Blur between Spending  
hould the government cut spending or 
raise taxes to deal with its long-term fis-
cal imbalance? As President Obama’s deficit 
commission rolls out its final report in the 
coming weeks, this issue will most likely 
 divide the political right and left. But, in many 
ways, the question
--- PAGE 270 ---
CHAPTER 12   THE DESIGN OF THE TAX SYSTEM
out, tax expenditures disproportionately ben-
efit those at the top of the economic ladder. 
According to their figures, tax expenditures 
increase the after-tax income of those in the 
bottom quintile by about 6 percent. Those in the 
top 1 percent of the income distribution  enjoy 
about twice that gain. Progressives who are 
concerned about the gap between rich and poor 
should be eager to scale back tax expenditures. 
Pundits on the right, meanwhile, are sus-
picious of anything that increases government 
revenue. But they should recognize that tax 
expenditures are best viewed as a hidden form 
of spending. If we eliminate tax expenditures 
and reduce marginal tax rates, as Mr. Bowles 
and Mr. Simpson propose, we are essentially 
doing what economic conservatives have long 
advocated: cutting spending and taxes. 
Yet another political problem is that each 
tax expenditure has its own political constit-
uency. If Congressman Blowhard ever got his 
way, the snipe hunters of the world would 
surely fight to keep their tax break. 
One major tax expenditure that the 
Bowles-Simpson plan would curtail or elim-
inate is the mortgage interest deduction. 
Without doubt, many homeowners and the 
real estate industry will object. But they won’t 
have the merits on their side. 
This subsidy to homeownership is neither 
economically efficient nor particularly equita-
ble. Economists have long pointed out that tax 
subsidies to housing, together with the high 
taxes on corporations, cause too much of the 
economy’s capital stock to be tied u
--- PAGE 271 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
Explain the benefits principle and the ability-to-pay principle. • What are 
vertical equity and horizontal equity? • Why is studying tax incidence 
 important for determining the equity of a tax system?
12-4 Conclusion: The Trade-off between Equity and Efficiency
Almost everyone agrees that equity and efficiency are the two most important 
goals of a tax system. But these two goals often conflict, especially when equity 
is judged by the progressivity of the tax system. People often disagree about tax 
policy because they attach different weights to these goals.
The recent history of tax policy shows how political leaders differ in their views 
on equity and efficiency. When Ronald Reagan was elected president in 1980, the 
marginal tax rate on the earnings of the richest Americans was 50 percent. On 
 interest income, the marginal tax rate was 70 percent. Reagan argued that such high 
tax rates greatly distorted economic incentives to work and save. In other words, 
he claimed that these high tax rates cost too much in terms of economic efficiency. 
Tax reform was, therefore, a high priority of his administration. Reagan signed into 
law large cuts in tax rates in 1981 and then again in 1986. When Reagan left office in 
1989, the richest Americans faced a marginal tax rate of only 28 percent.
The pendulum of political debate swings both ways. When Bill Clinton ran for 
president in 1992, he argued that the rich were not paying their fair share of taxes. 
In other words, the low tax rates on the rich violated his view of vertica
--- PAGE 272 ---
CHAPTER 12   THE DESIGN OF THE TAX SYSTEM
If the tax code exempts the first $20,000 of income 
from taxation and then taxes 25 percent of all income 
above that level, then a person who earns $50,000 
has an average tax rate of _____ percent and a mar-
ginal tax rate of _____ percent.
A toll is a tax on citizens who use toll roads. This pol-
icy can be viewed as an application of
a. the benefits principle.
In the United States, taxpayers in the top 1 percent 
of the income distribution pay about _____ percent of 
their income in federal taxes.
If the corporate income tax induces businesses to 
reduce their capital investment, then
a. the tax does not have any deadweight loss.
b. corporate shareholders benefit from the tax.
c. workers bear some of the burden of the tax.
d. the tax achieves the goal of vertical equity.
benefits principle, p. 236
ability-to-pay principle, p. 237
• The U.S. government raises revenue using various 
taxes. The most important taxes for the federal gov-
ernment are personal income taxes and payroll taxes 
for social insurance. The most important taxes for 
state and local governments are sales taxes and prop-
• The efficiency of a tax system refers to the costs it 
 imposes on taxpayers. There are two costs of taxes 
 beyond the transfer of resources from the taxpayer to 
the government. The first is the deadweight loss that 
arises as taxes alter incentives and distort the  allocation 
of resources. The second is the administrative  burden 
of complying with the tax laws.
• The equity of a tax system concerns whether the 
tax burden is distributed
--- PAGE 273 ---
PART IV   THE ECONOMICS OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR
1. The information in many of the tables in this chapter 
can be found in the Economic Report of the President, 
which appears annually. Using a recent issue of the 
report at your library or on the Internet, answer the 
following questions and provide some numbers 
to support your answers. (Hint: The website of the 
 Government Printing Office is http://www.gpo.gov.)
a. Figure 1 shows that government revenue as a per-
centage of total income has increased over time. Is 
this increase primarily attributable to changes in 
federal government revenue or in state and local 
b. Looking at the combined revenue of the federal 
government and state and local governments, 
how has the composition of total revenue changed 
over time? Are personal income taxes more or 
less important? Social insurance taxes? Corporate 
2. Suppose you are a typical person in the U.S. economy. 
You pay 4 percent of your income in a state income 
tax and 15.3 percent of your labor earnings in federal 
payroll taxes (employer and employee shares com-
bined). You also pay federal income taxes as in Table 2. 
How much tax of each type do you pay if you earn 
$30,000 a year? Taking all taxes into account, what are 
your average and marginal tax rates? What happens 
to your tax bill and to your average and marginal tax 
rates if your income rises to $60,000?
3. Some states exclude necessities, such as food and 
clothing, from their sales tax. Other states do not. 
Discuss the merits of this exclusion. Consider both 
4. When someone owns an asset (such as a share o
--- PAGE 274 ---
ted, in whole or in part.  WCN 02-200-203
