--- PAGE 390 ---
The Markets for the Factors 
hen you finish school, your income will be determined largely by what kind 
of job you take. If you become a computer programmer, you will earn more 
than if you become a gas station attendant. This fact is not surprising, but it 
is not obvious why it is true. No law requires that computer programmers be paid 
more than gas station attendants. No ethical principle says that programmers are 
more deserving. What then determines which job will pay you the higher wage?
Your income, of course, is a small piece of a larger economic picture. In 2015, 
the total income of all U.S. residents (a statistic called national income) was about 
$16 trillion. People earned this income in various ways. Workers earned 
about two-thirds of it in the form of wages and fringe benefits. 
The rest went to landowners and to the owners of 
--- PAGE 391 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
capital—the economy’s stock of equipment and structures—in the form of rent, 
profit, and interest. What determines how much goes to  workers? To landown-
ers? To the owners of capital? Why do some  workers earn higher wages than oth-
ers, some landowners higher rental income than  others, and some capital owners 
greater profit than others? Why, in particular, do computer programmers earn 
more than gas station attendants?
The answers to these questions, like most in economics, hinge on supply and 
demand. The supply and demand for labor, land, and capital determine the prices 
paid to workers, landowners, and capital owners. To understand why some peo-
ple have higher incomes than others, therefore, we need to look more deeply at 
the markets for the services they provide. That is our job in this and the next two 
This chapter provides the basic theory for the analysis of factor markets. As 
you may recall from Chapter 2, the factors of production are the inputs used to 
produce goods and services. Labor, land, and capital are the three most important 
factors of production. When a computer firm produces a new software program, it 
uses programmers’ time (labor), the physical space on which its offices are  located 
(land), and an office building and computer equipment (capital). Similarly, when 
a gas station sells gas, it uses attend
--- PAGE 392 ---
CHAPTER 18   THE MARKETS FOR THE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION
that hire the labor and use it to produce goods for sale. By examining the link be-
tween the production of goods and the demand for labor to make those goods, we 
gain insight into the determination of equilibrium wages. 
18-1a The Competitive Profit-Maximizing Firm
Let’s look at how a typical firm, such as an apple producer, decides what quantity 
of labor to demand. The firm owns an apple orchard and each week decides how 
many apple pickers to hire to harvest its crop. After the firm makes its hiring deci-
sion, the workers pick as many apples as they can. The firm then sells the apples, 
pays the workers, and keeps what is left as profit.
We make two assumptions about our firm. First, we assume that our firm is com-
petitive both in the market for apples (where the firm is a seller) and in the market 
for apple pickers (where the firm is a buyer). A competitive firm is a price taker. 
Because there are many other firms selling apples and hiring apple pickers, a single 
firm has little influence over the price it gets for apples or the wage it pays apple 
pickers. The firm takes the price and the wage as given by market conditions. It 
only has to decide how many apples to sell and how many workers to hire.
Second, we assume that the firm is profit-maximizing. Thus, the firm does not 
directly care about the number of w
--- PAGE 393 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
sell. Table 1 gives a numerical example. Column (1) shows the number of workers. 
Column (2) shows the quantity of apples the workers harvest each week.
These two columns of numbers describe the firm’s ability to produce apples. 
Recall that economists use the term production function to describe the relation-
ship between the quantity of the inputs used in production and the quantity of 
output from production. Here the “input” is the apple pickers and the “output” 
is the apples. The other inputs—the trees themselves, the land, the firm’s trucks 
and tractors, and so on—are held fixed for now. This firm’s production function 
shows that if the firm hires 1 worker, that worker will pick 100 bushels of apples 
per week. If the firm hires 2 workers, the 2 workers together will pick 180 bushels 
Figure 2 graphs the data on labor and output presented in Table 1. The number 
of workers is on the horizontal axis, and the amount of output is on the vertical 
axis. This figure illustrates the production function.
One of the Ten Principles of Economics introduced in Chapter 1 is that rational 
people think at the margin. This idea is the key to understanding how firms  decide 
what quantity of labor to hire. To take a step toward this decision, column (3) 
in Table 1 shows the marginal product of labor, the increase in the amount of 
output prod
--- PAGE 394 ---
CHAPTER 18   THE MARKETS FOR THE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION
18-1c  The Value of the Marginal Product  
Our profit-maximizing firm is concerned not about apples themselves but rather about 
the money it can make by producing and selling them. As a result, when deciding how 
many workers to hire to pick apples, the firm considers how much profit each worker 
will bring in. Because profit is total revenue minus total cost, the profit from an addi-
tional worker is the worker’s contribution to revenue minus the worker’s wage.
To find the worker’s contribution to revenue, we must convert the marginal 
product of labor (which is measured in bushels of apples) into the value of the mar-
ginal product (which is measured in dollars). We do this using the price of apples. 
To continue our example, if a bushel of apples sells for $10 and if an additional 
worker produces 80 bushels of apples, then the worker produces $800 of revenue.
The value of the marginal product of any input is the marginal product of that 
input multiplied by the market price of the output. Column (4) in Table 1 shows 
the value of the marginal product of labor in our example, assuming the price 
of apples is $10 per bushel. Because the market price is constant for a competi-
tive firm while the marginal product declines with more workers, the value of the 
marginal product diminishes as the number of workers rises. Econ
--- PAGE 395 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
rises. The figure also includes a horizontal line at the market wage. To maximize 
profit, the firm hires workers up to the point where these two curves cross. Below 
this level of employment, the value of the marginal product exceeds the wage, so 
hiring another worker increases profit. Above this level of employment, the value 
of the marginal product is less than the wage, so the marginal worker is unprofit-
able. Thus, a competitive, profit-maximizing firm hires workers up to the point at which 
the value of the marginal product of labor equals the wage.
Now that we understand the profit-maximizing hiring strategy for a com-
petitive firm, we can offer a theory of labor demand. Recall that a firm’s labor-
demand curve tells us the quantity of labor that a firm decides to hire at any given 
wage. Figure 3 shows that the firm makes that decision by choosing the quan-
tity of labor at which the value of the marginal product equals the wage. As a 
result, the value-of-marginal-product curve is the labor-demand curve for a competitive, 
18-1d What Causes the Labor-Demand Curve to Shift?
We now understand that the labor-demand curve reflects the value of the mar-
ginal product of labor. With this insight in mind, let’s consider a few of the things 
that might cause the labor-demand curve to shift.
The Output Price  The value of the margina
--- PAGE 396 ---
CHAPTER 18   THE MARKETS FOR THE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION
technological progress: Scientists and engineers are constantly figuring out new 
and better ways of doing things. This has profound implications for the labor mar-
ket. Advances in technology typically raise the marginal product of labor, which in 
turn increases the demand for labor and shifts the labor-demand curve to the right. 
It is also possible for technological change to reduce labor demand. The inven-
tion of a cheap industrial robot, for instance, could conceivably reduce the mar-
ginal product of labor, shifting the labor-demand curve to the left. Economists 
call this labor-saving technological change. History suggests, however, that most 
technological progress is instead labor-augmenting. For example, a carpenter 
with a nail gun is more productive than a carpenter with only a hammer. Labor-
augmenting technological advance explains persistently rising employment in the 
face of rising wages: Even though wages (adjusted for inflation) increased by 165 
percent from 1960 to 2015, firms nonetheless more than doubled the amount of 
The Supply of Other Factors  The quantity of one factor of production that is 
available can affect the marginal product of other factors. The productivity of 
apple pickers depends, for instance, on the availability of ladders. If the supply 
Input Demand and Output Supply:  
Two Sid
--- PAGE 397 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
of ladders declines, the marginal product of apple pickers will decline as well, 
 reducing the demand for apple pickers. We consider the linkage among the  factors 
of production more fully later in the chapter.
Define marginal product of labor and value of the marginal product of labor. • 
Describe how a competitive, profit-maximizing firm decides how many 
Having analyzed labor demand in detail, let’s turn to the other side of the market 
and consider labor supply. A formal model of labor supply is included in Chapter 
21, where we develop the theory of household decision making. Here we infor-
mally discuss the decisions that lie behind the labor-supply curve.
18-2a The Trade-off between Work and Leisure
One of the Ten Principles of Economics in Chapter 1 is that people face trade-offs. 
Probably no trade-off in a person’s life is more obvious or more important than 
the trade-off between work and leisure. The more hours you spend working, 
the fewer hours you have to watch TV, browse social media, enjoy dinner with 
friends, or pursue your favorite hobby. The trade-off between labor and leisure 
lies behind the labor-supply curve.
Another of the Ten Principles of Economics is that the cost of something is what 
you give up to get it. What do you give up to get an hour of leisure? You give up 
an hour of work, which in turn means an 
--- PAGE 398 ---
CHAPTER 18   THE MARKETS FOR THE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION
are many explanations for this development, one of them is changing tastes, or 
attitudes toward work. Sixty-five years ago, it was the norm for women to stay 
at home and raise their children. Today, the typical family size 
is smaller, and more mothers choose to work. The result is an 
increase in the supply of labor.
Changes in Alternative Opportunities  The supply of labor 
in any one labor market depends on the opportunities avail-
able in other labor markets. If the wage earned by pear pick-
ers suddenly rises, some apple pickers may choose to switch 
occupations, causing the supply of labor in the market for apple 
Immigration  Movement of workers from region to region, 
or country to country, is another important source of shifts in 
labor supply. When immigrants come to the United States, for 
instance, the supply of labor in the United States increases and 
the supply of labor in the immigrants’ home countries falls. In 
fact, much of the policy debate about immigration centers on 
its effect on labor supply and, thereby, equilibrium wages in the 
Who has a greater opportunity cost of enjoying 
 leisure—a janitor or a brain surgeon? Explain. Can 
this help explain why doctors work such long hours?
18-3  Equilibrium in the Labor 
So far we have established two facts about how wages are deter-
mined in competitive l
--- PAGE 399 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
This brings us to an important lesson: Any event that changes the supply or  demand 
for labor must change the equilibrium wage and the value of the marginal product by the 
same amount because these must always be equal. To see how this works, let’s consider 
some events that shift these curves. 
18-3a Shifts in Labor Supply
Suppose that immigration increases the number of workers willing to pick apples. 
As Figure 5 shows, the supply of labor shifts to the right from S1 to S2. At the ini-
tial wage W1, the quantity of labor supplied now exceeds the quantity demanded. 
This surplus of labor puts downward pressure on the wage of apple pickers, and 
the fall in the wage from W1 to W2 makes it profitable for firms to hire more work-
ers. As the number of workers employed in each apple orchard rises, the marginal 
product of a worker falls, and so does the value of the marginal product. In the 
new equilibrium, both the wage and the value of the marginal product of labor 
are lower than they were before the influx of new workers.
An episode from Israel, studied by MIT economist Joshua Angrist, illustrates 
how a shift in labor supply can alter the equilibrium in a labor market. During 
most of the 1980s, many thousands of Palestinians regularly commuted from their 
homes in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip to jobs in Israel, pr
--- PAGE 400 ---
CHAPTER 18   THE MARKETS FOR THE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION
When labor supply increases from  
S1 to S2, perhaps because of an 
 immigration wave of new workers, the 
equilibrium wage falls from W1 to W2. 
At this lower wage, firms hire more 
labor, so employment rises from L1 to 
L2. The change in the wage reflects a 
change in the value of the marginal 
product of labor: With more workers, 
the added output from an extra worker 
3. . . . and raises employment.
different kinds of workers. A wave of immigration may lower wages in those labor 
markets in which the new immigrants seek work, but it could have the opposite 
effect in other labor markets. For example, if the new immigrants look for jobs as 
apple pickers, the supply of apple pickers increases and the wage of apple pickers 
declines. But suppose the new immigrants are physicians who use some of their 
income to buy apples. In this case, the wave of immigration increases the supply of 
physicians but increases the demand for apples and thus apple pickers. As a result, 
the wages of physicians decline, and the wages of apple pickers rise. The linkages 
among various markets—sometimes called general equilibrium  effects—make ana-
lyzing the full effect of immigration more complex than it first appears. 
18-3b Shifts in Labor Demand
Now suppose that an increase in the popularity of apples causes their price to rise. 
This pri
--- PAGE 401 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
Here is an interview with Pia 
Orrenius, a senior economist at the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas who 
Q: What can you tell us about the size 
of the immigrant population in the United 
A: Immigrants make up about 13.3 per-
cent of the overall population, which means 
about 42 million foreign-born live in the 
United States. The commonly accepted 2014 
estimate for the unauthorized portion of the 
foreign-born population is 11.3 million. Immi-
grants come from all parts of the world, but 
we’ve seen big changes in their origins. In the 
1950s and 1960s, 75 percent of immigrants 
were from Europe. Today, over 80 percent are 
from Latin America and Asia. Inflows are also 
much larger today, with 1 million to 2 million 
newcomers entering each year, although lev-
els were significantly depressed in the after-
math of the Great Recession of 2007–2009, 
when the housing bust led to a significant 
decline in illegal immigration.
What’s interesting about the United 
States is how our economy has been able to 
absorb immigrants and put them to work. 
U.S. immigrants are much more likely to be 
working compared with immigrants in other 
developed countries. This is partly because 
we don’t set high entry-level wages or have 
cumbersome hiring and firing rules. In this 
type of flexible system, there are more job 
openings. Workers have more oppo
--- PAGE 402 ---
CHAPTER 18   THE MARKETS FOR THE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION
Q: What about the low-skilled immigration?
A: With low-skilled immigration, the eco-
nomic benefits of the added labor, such as 
lower prices for consumers and higher returns 
to capital, have to be balanced against the 
fiscal impact, which is likely negative. The 
fiscal impact is the difference between what 
families contribute in taxes and what they use 
up in the form of publicly provided services. 
What makes the fiscal issue more difficult 
is the distribution of the burden. The federal 
government reaps much of the revenue from 
immigrants who work and pay employment 
taxes. State and local governments realize 
less of that benefit and have to pay more 
of the costs associated with low-skilled 
 immigration— usually education and health 
Q: Does it matter whether the immigration 
A: Illegal immigration has helped fuel the 
U.S. economy for many years. Five percent of 
the U.S. workforce is made up of unautho-
rized workers—the outcome of decades of 
robust labor demand and, until recently, lax 
enforcement. Nevertheless, from an economic 
and fiscal perspective, it makes more sense 
to differentiate among immigrants of various 
skill levels than it does to focus on legal 
The economic benefits of low-skilled im-
migrants aren’t typically going to depend on 
how they entered the United States. Unau-
thorized immigran
--- PAGE 403 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
productivity experiences. Around 1973, the U.S. economy experienced a signif-
icant slowdown in productivity growth that lasted until 1995. The cause of this 
productivity slowdown is yet to be fully explained, but the link between produc-
tivity and real wages is exactly as standard theory predicts. The slowdown in pro-
ductivity growth from 2.7 to 1.4 percent per year coincided with a slowdown in 
real wage growth from 2.7 to 1.2 percent per year. 
Productivity growth picked up again about 1995, and many observers hailed 
the arrival of the “new economy.” This productivity acceleration is most often 
attributed to the spread of computers and information technology. As theory pre-
dicts, growth in real wages picked up as well. From 1995 to 2015, productivity grew 
by 2.1 percent per year and real wages grew by 1.8 percent per year.
The bottom line: Both theory and history confirm the close connection between 
productivity and real wages. ●
How does immigration of workers affect labor supply, labor demand, the 
marginal product of labor, and the equilibrium wage?
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics.
n the preceding pages, we built our analysis of the labor market with 
the tools of supply and demand. In doing so, we assumed that the 
labor market was competitive. That is, we assumed that there were many 
buyers and sellers of labor, so ea
--- PAGE 404 ---
CHAPTER 18   THE MARKETS FOR THE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION
18-4  The Other Factors of Production:  
We have seen how firms decide how much labor to hire and how these deci-
sions determine workers’ wages. At the same time that firms are hiring workers, 
they are also deciding about other inputs to production. For example, our apple-
producing firm might have to choose the size of its apple orchard and the number 
of ladders for its apple pickers. We can think of the firm’s factors of production as 
falling into three categories: labor, land, and capital.
The meaning of the terms labor and land is clear, but the definition of capital is 
somewhat tricky. Economists use the term capital to refer to the stock of equip-
ment and structures used for production. That is, the economy’s capital represents 
the accumulation of goods produced in the past that are being used in the present 
to produce new goods and services. For our apple firm, the capital stock includes 
the ladders used to climb the trees, the trucks used to transport the apples, the 
buildings used to store the apples, and even the trees themselves.
18-4a Equilibrium in the Markets for Land and Capital 
What determines how much the owners of land and capital earn for their contri-
bution to the production process? Before answering this question, we need to dis-
tinguish between two prices: the purchase price and the rental
--- PAGE 405 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
the rental price of land, shown in panel (a), and the rental price of capital, shown 
in panel (b), are determined by supply and demand. Moreover, the demand for 
land and capital is determined just like the demand for labor. That is, when our 
apple-producing firm is deciding how much land and how many ladders to rent, 
it follows the same logic as when deciding how many workers to hire. For both 
land and capital, the firm increases the quantity hired until the value of the factor’s 
marginal product equals the factor’s price. Thus, the demand curve for each factor 
reflects the marginal productivity of that factor. 
We can now explain how much income goes to labor, how much goes to land-
owners, and how much goes to the owners of capital. As long as the firms using 
the factors of production are competitive and profit-maximizing, each factor’s 
rental price must equal the value of the marginal product for that factor. Labor, 
land, and capital each earn the value of their marginal contribution to the production 
Now consider the purchase price of land and capital. The rental price and the 
purchase price are related: Buyers are willing to pay more for a piece of land or 
capital if it produces a valuable stream of rental income. And as we have just seen, 
the equilibrium rental income at any point in time equals the value of that fact
--- PAGE 406 ---
CHAPTER 18   THE MARKETS FOR THE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION
18-4b Linkages among the Factors of Production
We have seen that the price paid for any factor of production—labor, land, or 
 capital—equals the value of the marginal product of that factor. The marginal 
product of any factor, in turn, depends on the quantity of that factor that is avail-
able. Because of diminishing marginal product, a factor in abundant supply has 
a low marginal product and thus a low price, and a factor in scarce supply has a 
high marginal product and a high price. As a result, when the supply of a factor 
falls, its equilibrium price rises. 
When the supply of any factor changes, however, the effects are not limited 
to the market for that factor. In most situations, factors of production are used 
together in a way that makes the productivity of each factor depend on the quan-
tities of the other factors available for use in the production process. Therefore, 
when some event changes the supply of any one factor of production, it will typi-
cally affect not only the earnings of that factor but also the earnings of all the other 
For example, suppose a hurricane destroys many of the ladders that workers 
use to pick apples from the orchards. What happens to the earnings of the vari-
ous factors of production? Most obviously, when the supply of ladders falls, the 
equilibrium rental price of ladders 
--- PAGE 407 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
The Black Death led to economic prosperity for the peasant classes and reduced 
incomes for the landed classes. ●
 What determines the income of the owners of land and capital? • How 
would an increase in the quantity of capital affect the incomes of 
those who already own capital? How would it affect the incomes of workers?
This chapter has explained how labor, land, and capital are compensated for the 
roles they play in the production process. The theory developed here is called the 
neoclassical theory of distribution. According to the neoclassical theory, the amount 
paid to each factor of production depends on the supply and demand for that 
factor. The demand, in turn, depends on that particular factor’s marginal produc-
tivity. In equilibrium, each factor of production earns the value of its marginal 
contribution to the production of goods and services.
The neoclassical theory of distribution is widely accepted. Most economists 
begin with the neoclassical theory when trying to explain how the U.S. econo-
my’s $16 trillion of income is distributed among the economy’s various members. 
In the following two chapters, we consider the distribution of income in more 
detail. As you will see, the neoclassical theory provides the framework for this 
Even at this point, you can use the theory to answer the question that  began 
this cha
--- PAGE 408 ---
CHAPTER 18   THE MARKETS FOR THE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION
• The economy’s income is distributed in the mar-
kets for the factors of production. The three most 
important factors of production are labor, land, and 
• The demand for factors, such as labor, is a derived 
 demand that comes from firms that use the factors 
to produce goods and services. Competitive, profit- 
maximizing firms hire each factor up to the point 
at which the value of the factor’s marginal product 
• The supply of labor arises from individuals’ trade-
off between work and leisure. An upward-sloping 
labor-supply curve means that people respond to 
an increase in the wage by working more hours and 
• The price paid to each factor adjusts to balance the 
supply and demand for that factor. Because factor 
demand reflects the value of the marginal product of 
that factor, in equilibrium each factor is compensated 
according to its marginal contribution to the produc-
tion of goods and services.
• Because factors of production are used together, the 
marginal product of any one factor depends on the 
quantities of all factors that are available. As a result, 
a change in the supply of one factor alters the equilib-
rium earnings of all the factors.
factors of production, p. 362
production function, p. 364
marginal product of labor, p. 364
diminishing marginal product, p. 364
value of the marginal product, p. 36
--- PAGE 409 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
1. Suppose that the president proposes a new law 
aimed at reducing healthcare costs: All Americans are 
 required to eat one apple daily. 
a. How would this apple-a-day law affect the 
 demand and equilibrium price of apples?
b. How would the law affect the marginal product and 
the value of the marginal product of apple pickers?
c. How would the law affect the demand and 
 equilibrium wage for apple pickers?
2. Show the effect of each of the following events on 
the market for labor in the computer manufacturing 
a. Congress buys personal computers for all U.S. 
b. More college students major in engineering and 
c. Computer firms build new manufacturing plants.
3. Suppose that labor is the only input used by a 
 perfectly competitive firm. The firm’s production 
a. Calculate the marginal product for each additional 
b. Each unit of output sells for $10. Calculate the 
value of the marginal product of each worker.
c. Compute the demand schedule showing the num-
ber of workers hired for all wages from zero to 
d. Graph the firm’s demand curve.
e. What happens to this demand curve if the price of 
output rises from $10 to $12 per unit?
4. Smiling Cow Dairy can sell all the milk it wants for $4 
a gallon, and it can rent all the robots it wants to milk 
the cows at a capital rental price of $100 a day. It faces 
the following production sc
--- PAGE 410 ---
CHAPTER 18   THE MARKETS FOR THE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION
6. Your enterprising uncle opens a sandwich shop that 
employs 7 people. The employees are paid $12 per hour, 
and a sandwich sells for $6. If your uncle is maximizing 
his profit, what is the value of the marginal product of 
the last worker he hired? What is that worker’s mar-
7. Leadbelly Co. sells pencils in a perfectly competitive 
product market and hires workers in a perfectly compet-
itive labor market. Assume that the market wage rate for 
a. What rule should Leadbelly follow to hire the 
 profit-maximizing amount of labor?
b. At the profit-maximizing level of output, the mar-
ginal product of the last worker hired is 30 boxes 
of pencils per day. Calculate the price of a box of 
c. Draw a diagram of the labor market for pencil work-
ers (as in Figure 4 of this chapter) next to a diagram 
of the labor supply and demand for Leadbelly Co. (as 
in Figure 3). Label the equilibrium wage and quantity 
of labor for both the market and the firm. How are 
d. Suppose some pencil workers switch to jobs in the 
growing computer industry. On the side-by-side 
 diagrams from part (c), show how this change  
affects the equilibrium wage and quantity of labor 
for both the pencil market and for Leadbelly. How 
does this change affect the marginal product of labor 
8. Policymakers sometimes propose laws requiring firms to 
give wor
--- PAGE 411 ---

--- PAGE 412 ---
n the United States today, the typical physician earns about $200,000 a year, the 
typical police officer about $60,000, and the typical fast-food cook about $20,000. 
These examples illustrate the large differences in earnings in our economy. 
These differences explain why some people live in mansions, ride in limousines, 
and vacation on the French Riviera, while other people live in small apartments, 
ride the bus, and vacation in their own backyards.
Why do earnings vary so much from person to person? Chapter 18, which 
developed the basic neoclassical theory of the labor market, offers an answer to 
this question. There we saw that wages are governed by labor supply and labor 
demand. Labor demand, in turn, reflects the marginal productivity of labor. 
In equilibrium, each worker is paid the value of her marginal 
contribution to the economy’s production of goods and 
Earnings and Discrimination
--- PAGE 413 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
This theory of the labor market, though widely accepted by economists, is only 
the beginning of the story. To understand the wide variation in earnings that we 
observe, we must go beyond this general framework and examine more precisely 
what determines the supply and demand for different types of labor. That is our 
19-1 Some Determinants of Equilibrium Wages
Workers differ from one another in many ways, as do jobs. In this section, we 
consider how the characteristics of workers and jobs affect labor supply, labor 
 demand, and equilibrium wages. 
19-1a Compensating Differentials
When a worker is deciding whether to take a job, the wage is only one of many 
job attributes that the worker takes into account. Some jobs are easy, fun, and safe, 
while others are hard, dull, and dangerous. The better the job as gauged by these 
nonmonetary characteristics, the more people there are who are willing to do the 
job at any given wage. In other words, the supply of labor for easy, fun, and safe 
jobs is greater than the supply of labor for hard, dull, and dangerous jobs. As a 
result, “good” jobs will tend to have lower equilibrium wages than “bad” ones. 
For example, imagine you are looking for a summer job in a local beach com-
munity. Two kinds of jobs are available. You can take a job as a beach-badge 
checker, or you can take a job as a 
--- PAGE 414 ---
CHAPTER 19   EARNINGS AND DISCRIMINATION
As we discussed in the previous chapter, the word capital usually refers to an econ-
omy’s stock of equipment and structures. The capital stock includes the farmer’s 
tractor, the manufacturer’s factory, and the teacher’s chalkboard. The essence of 
capital is that it is a factor of production that itself has been produced.
There is another type of capital that, while less tangible than physical capital, 
is just as important to the economy’s production. Human capital is the accumula-
tion of investments in people. The most important type of human capital is edu-
cation. Like all forms of capital, education represents an expenditure of resources 
at one time to raise productivity in the future. But unlike an investment in other 
forms of capital, an investment in education is tied to a specific person, and this 
linkage is what makes it human capital.
Not surprisingly, workers with more human capital earn more on average than 
those with less human capital. College graduates in the United States, for exam-
ple, earn almost twice as much as those with only a high school diploma. This 
large difference has been documented in many countries around the world. It 
tends to be even larger in less developed countries, where educated workers are 
From the perspective of supply and demand it is easy to see why educa-
tion raises wages. Firms—the 
--- PAGE 415 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
The first hypothesis is that international trade has altered the relative demand 
for skilled and unskilled labor. In recent years, the amount of trade with other 
countries has increased substantially. As a percentage of total U.S. production of 
goods and services, imports have risen from 8 percent in 1974 to 17 percent in 
2014, and exports have risen from 8 percent in 1974 to 14 percent in 2014. Because 
 unskilled labor is plentiful and cheap in many foreign countries, 
the United States tends to import goods produced with unskilled 
labor and export goods produced with skilled labor. Thus, when 
international trade expands, the domestic demand for skilled 
labor rises and the domestic demand for unskilled labor falls.
The second hypothesis is that changes in technology have 
 altered the relative demand for skilled and unskilled labor. 
Consider, for instance, the introduction of computers. Comput-
ers raise the demand for the skilled workers who can use them 
and reduce the demand for the unskilled workers whose jobs 
are replaced by them. For example, many companies now rely 
more on computer databases, and less on filing cabinets, to keep 
business records. This change raises the demand for computer 
programmers and reduces the demand for filing clerks. Thus, as 
more firms use computers, the demand for skilled labor rises and 

--- PAGE 416 ---
CHAPTER 19   EARNINGS AND DISCRIMINATION
An economist makes the case for  
t’s become almost conventional wisdom that 
throwing more money at public education 
doesn’t produce results. But what if conven-
A new paper from economists C. Kirabo 
Jackson, Rucker Johnson and Claudia Per-
sico suggests that it is. To disentangle cor-
relation from causation, they look at periods 
from 1955 through 1985 when courts ordered 
governments to spend more on schools, from 
kindergarten through 12th grade. They then 
track how students in those areas did, up 
through 2011. The result is a very detailed 
long-term picture of the effect of spending 
The economists find that spending works. 
Specifically, they find that a 10 percent 
increase in spending, on average, leads chil-
dren to complete 0.27 more years of school, 
to make wages that are 7.25 percent higher 
and to have a substantially reduced chance 
of falling into poverty. These are long-term, 
durable results. Conclusion: throwing money 
Here’s the hitch: The authors find that 
the benefits of increased spending are much 
stronger for poor kids than for wealthier ones. 
So if you, like me, are in the upper portion of 
the U.S. income distribution, you may be read-
ing this and thinking: “Why should I be paying 
more for some poor kid to be educated?” After 
all, why should one person pay the cost while 
another reaps the benefits?

--- PAGE 417 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
19-1c Ability, Effort, and Chance
Why do major league baseball players get paid more than minor league players? 
Certainly, the higher wage is not a compensating differential. Playing in the major 
leagues is not a less pleasant job than playing in the minor leagues; in fact, the 
opposite is true. The major leagues do not require more years of schooling or more 
experience. To a large extent, players in the major leagues earn more because they 
have greater natural ability. 
Natural ability is important for workers in all occupations. Because of heredity 
and upbringing, people differ in their physical and mental attributes. Some peo-
ple are strong, others weak. Some people are smart, others less so. Some people 
are outgoing, others awkward in social situations. These and many other personal 
characteristics determine how productive workers are and, therefore, play a role 
in determining the wages they earn.
Closely related to ability is effort. Some people work hard; others are lazy. We 
should not be surprised to find that those who work hard are more productive 
and earn higher wages. To some extent, firms reward hard work directly by pay-
ing people based on what they produce. Salespeople, for instance, are often paid 
a percentage of the sales they make. At other times, hard work is rewarded less 
directly in the form of a higher
--- PAGE 418 ---
CHAPTER 19   EARNINGS AND DISCRIMINATION
Hamermesh and Biddle found that beauty pays. People who are deemed more 
attractive than average earn 5 percent more than people of average looks, and peo-
ple of average looks earn 5 to 10 percent more than people considered less attrac-
tive than average. Similar results were found for men and women.
What explains these differences in wages? There are several ways to interpret 
One interpretation is that good looks are a type of innate ability determining 
productivity and wages. Some people are born with the physical attributes of a 
movie star; other people are not. Good looks are useful in any job in which work-
ers present themselves to the public—such as acting, sales, and waiting on tables. 
In this case, an attractive worker is more valuable to the firm than an unattractive 
worker. The firm’s willingness to pay more to attractive workers reflects its custom-
A second interpretation is that reported beauty is an indirect measure of other 
types of ability. How attractive a person appears depends on more than just 
heredity. It also depends on dress, hairstyle, personal demeanor, and other attri-
butes that a person can control. Perhaps a person who successfully projects an 
 attractive image in a survey interview is more likely to be an intelligent person who 
succeeds at other tasks as well.
A third interpretation is that the b
--- PAGE 419 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
the signaling view, education does not enhance productivity, so raising all work-
ers’ educational levels would not affect wages. 
Most likely, the truth lies somewhere between these two extremes. The bene-
fits of education are probably a combination of the productivity-enhancing effects 
of human capital and the productivity-revealing effects of signaling. The relative 
size of these two effects is an open question.
19-1e The Superstar Phenomenon
Although most actors earn little and often take jobs as waiters to support them-
selves, Robert Downey, Jr., earns millions of dollars for each film he makes. Simi-
larly, while most people who play tennis do it as a hobby, Maria Sharapova earns 
millions on the pro tour. Downey and Sharapova are superstars in their fields, 
and their great public appeal is reflected in astronomical incomes.
Why do Downey and Sharapova earn so much? It is not surprising that in-
comes differ within occupations. Good carpenters earn more than mediocre car-
penters, and good plumbers earn more than mediocre plumbers. People vary in 
ability and effort, and these differences lead to differences in income. Yet the best 
carpenters and plumbers do not earn the many millions that are common among 
the best actors and athletes. What explains the difference?
To understand the tremendous incomes of Downey and Sharapova
--- PAGE 420 ---
CHAPTER 19   EARNINGS AND DISCRIMINATION
One reason for above-equilibrium wages is minimum-wage laws, as we first 
saw in Chapter 6. Most workers in the economy are not affected by these laws 
because their equilibrium wages are well above the legal minimum. But for some 
workers, especially the least skilled and experienced, minimum-wage laws raise 
wages above the level they would earn in an unregulated labor market.
A second reason that wages might rise above their equilibrium level is the mar-
ket power of labor unions. A union is a worker association that bargains with 
employers over wages and working conditions. Unions often raise wages above 
the level that would prevail in their absence, perhaps because they can threaten to 
withhold labor from the firm by calling a strike. Studies suggest that union work-
ers earn about 10 to 20 percent more than similar, nonunion workers.
A third reason for above-equilibrium wages is based on the theory of efficiency 
wages. This theory holds that a firm can find it profitable to pay high wages 
 because doing so increases the productivity of its workers. In particular, high 
wages may reduce worker turnover, increase worker effort, and raise the quality 
of workers who apply for jobs at the firm. If this theory is correct, then some firms 
may choose to pay their workers more than they would normally earn.
Above-equilibrium wages, w
--- PAGE 421 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
black man. Taken at face value, these differentials look like evidence that employ-
ers discriminate against blacks and women.
Yet there is a potential problem with this inference. Even in a labor market 
free of discrimination, different people have different wages. People differ in 
the amount of human capital they have and in the kinds of work they are able 
and willing to do. The wage differences we observe in an economy are, to some 
extent, attributable to the determinants of equilibrium wages we discussed in 
the preceding section. Simply observing differences in wages among broad 
groups—whites and blacks, men and women—does not prove that employers 
Consider, for example, the role of human capital. In 2014, among men aged 
25 and older, 32 percent of the white population had a college degree, compared 
with 20 percent of the black population. Among women aged 25 and older, 32 
percent of the white population had a college degree, compared with 24 percent 
of the black population. Thus, at least some of the difference between the wages 
of whites and the wages of blacks can be traced to differences in educational 
Moreover, human capital may be more important in explaining wage differ-
entials than years of schooling suggest. Historically, public schools in predomi-
nantly black areas have been of lower quality—as measured by exp
--- PAGE 422 ---
CHAPTER 19   EARNINGS AND DISCRIMINATION
drivers. The relative wages of secretaries and truck drivers depend in part on the 
working conditions of each job. Because these nonmonetary aspects are hard to 
measure, it is difficult to gauge the practical importance of compensating differen-
tials in explaining the wage differences that we observe. 
In the end, the study of wage differences among groups does not establish any 
clear conclusion about the prevalence of discrimination in U.S. labor markets. 
able to discrimination, but there is no consensus about how much. The only con-
clusion about which economists are in consensus is a negative one: Because the 
differences in average wages among groups in part reflect differences in human 
capital and job characteristics, they do not by themselves say anything about how 
much discrimination there is in the labor market. 
Of course, differences in human capital among groups of workers may also 
reflect a kind of discrimination. The less rigorous curriculums historically offered 
to female students, for instance, can be considered a discriminatory practice. Sim-
ilarly, the inferior schools historically available to black students may be traced to 
prejudice on the part of city councils and school boards. But this kind of discrim-
ination occurs long before the worker enters the labor market. In this case, the 
disease is political,
--- PAGE 423 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
economies provide a natural antidote to employer discrimination. That antidote is 
Imagine an economy in which workers are differentiated by their hair color. 
Blondes and brunettes have the same skills, experience, and work ethic. Yet 
 because of discrimination, employers prefer to hire workers with brunette hair. 
Thus, the demand for blondes is lower than it otherwise would be. As a result, 
blondes earn a lower wage than brunettes. 
How long can this wage differential persist? In this economy, there is an easy 
way for a firm to beat out its competitors: It can hire blonde workers. By hiring 
blondes, a firm pays lower wages and thus has lower costs than firms that hire 
brunettes. Over time, more and more “blonde” firms enter the market to take 
 advantage of this cost advantage. The existing “brunette” firms have higher costs 
and, therefore, begin to lose money when faced with the new competitors. These 
losses induce the brunette firms to go out of business. Eventually, the entry of 
blonde firms and the exit of brunette firms cause the demand for blonde workers 
to rise and the demand for brunette workers to fall. This process continues until 
the wage differential disappears. 
Put simply, business owners who care only about making money are at an 
 advantage when competing against those who also care about discriminating. As 

--- PAGE 424 ---
CHAPTER 19   EARNINGS AND DISCRIMINATION
The story of southern streetcars illustrates a general lesson: Business owners 
are usually more interested in making profits than in discriminating against a par-
of the discrimination often lies not with the firms themselves but elsewhere. In 
this particular case, the streetcar companies segregated whites and blacks because 
discriminatory laws, which the companies opposed, required them to do so. ●
19-2c Discrimination by Customers and Governments 
The profit motive is a strong force acting to eliminate discriminatory wage dif-
ferentials, but there are limits to its corrective abilities. Two important limiting 
factors are customer preferences and government policies.
 To see how customer preferences for discrimination can affect wages, con-
sider again our imaginary economy with blondes and brunettes. Suppose that 
restaurant owners discriminate against blondes when hiring waiters. As a result, 
blonde waiters earn lower wages than brunette waiters. In this case, a restaurant 
can open up with blonde waiters and charge lower prices. If customers care only 
about the quality and price of their meals, the discriminatory firms will be driven 
out of business, and the wage differential will disappear.
waiters. If this discriminatory preference is strong, the entry of blonde restau-
rants need not succeed in eliminating the wage differe
--- PAGE 425 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
difficult to measure a particular worker’s contribution to the production of goods 
One type of firm in which such measurements are easier is the sports team. 
Professional teams have many objective measures of productivity. In baseball, for 
 instance, we can measure a player’s batting average, the frequency of home runs, 
the number of stolen bases, and so on.
Studies of sports teams suggest that racial discrimination has, in fact, been com-
mon and that much of the blame lies with customers. One study, published in the 
Journal of Labor Economics in 1988, examined the salaries of basketball players and 
found that black players earned 20 percent less than white players of comparable 
ability. The study also found that attendance at basketball games was larger for 
teams with a greater proportion of white players. One interpretation of these facts 
is that, at least at the time of the study, customer discrimination made black players 
less profitable than white players for team owners. In the presence of such cus-
tomer discrimination, a discriminatory wage gap can persist, even if team owners 
A similar situation once existed for baseball players. A study using data from 
the late 1960s showed that black players earned less than comparable white play-
ers. Moreover, fewer fans attended games pitched by blacks than games pitched by 
wh
--- PAGE 426 ---
CHAPTER 19   EARNINGS AND DISCRIMINATION
1. Ted leaves his job as a high school math teacher and 
returns to school to study the latest developments 
in computer programming, after which he takes 
a  higher-paying job at a software firm. This is an 
a. a compensating differential.
2. Marshall and Lily work at a local department store. 
Marshall, who greets customers as they arrive, is paid 
less than Lily, who cleans the bathrooms. This is an 
a. a compensating differential.
3. Barney runs a small manufacturing company. He 
pays his employees about twice as much as other 
firms in the area, even though he could pay less and 
still  recruit all the workers he wants. He believes 
that higher wages make his workers more loyal and 
hard-working. This is an example of
a. a compensating differential.
4. A business consulting firm hires Robin because she 
was a math major in college. Her new job does not  
require any of the mathematics she learned, but the 
firm believes that anyone who can graduate with a 
math degree must be very smart. This is an example of
a. a compensating differential.
5. Measuring to what extent discrimination affects labor 
market outcomes is difficult because
a. data on wages are crucial but not readily available.
b. firms misreport the wages they pay to hide dis-
c. workers differ in their attributes and the types of 
d. the same minimum-wage law applies to
--- PAGE 427 ---
compensating differential, p. 384
1. Why are coal miners paid more than other workers 
with similar amounts of education?
2. In what sense is education a type of capital?
3. How might education raise a worker’s wage without 
raising the worker’s productivity?
4. What conditions lead to highly compensated super-
stars? Would you expect to see superstars in dentistry? 
5. Give three reasons a worker’s wage might be above 
the level that balances supply and demand.
6. What difficulties arise in deciding whether a group of 
workers has a lower wage because of discrimination?
7. Do the forces of economic competition tend to exacer-
bate or ameliorate discrimination based on race? 
8. Give an example of how discrimination might persist 
1. College students sometimes work as summer interns 
for private firms or the government. Many of these 
positions pay little or nothing.
a. What is the opportunity cost of taking such a job?
b. Explain why students are willing to take these 
c. If you were to compare the earnings later in life 
of workers who had worked as interns and those 
who had taken summer jobs that paid more, what 
2. As explained in Chapter 6, a minimum-wage law 
distorts the market for low-wage labor. To reduce this 
distortion, some economists advocate a two-tiered 
minimum-wage system, with a regular minimum 
wage for adult workers and a lower, “subminimum” 
wage for teen
--- PAGE 428 ---
CHAPTER 19   EARNINGS AND DISCRIMINATION
b. Some other colleges and universities have a policy 
of paying equal salaries to professors in all fields. 
At some of these schools, economics professors 
have lighter teaching loads than professors in 
some other fields. What role do the differences in 
5. Imagine that someone offered you a choice: You could 
spend four years studying at the world’s best uni-
versity, but you would have to keep your attendance 
there a secret. Or you could be awarded an official de-
gree from the world’s best university, but you couldn’t 
actually attend. Which choice do you think would 
enhance your future earnings more? What does your 
answer say about the debate over signaling versus hu-
man capital in the role of education?
6. When recording devices were first invented more than 
100 years ago, musicians could suddenly supply their 
music to large audiences at low cost. How do you 
suppose this development affected the income of the 
best musicians? How do you suppose it affected the 
income of average musicians?
7. A current debate in education is whether teachers 
should be paid on a standard pay scale based solely 
upon their years of training and teaching experience, 
or whether part of their salary should be based upon 
their performance (called “merit pay”).
a. Why might merit pay be desirable?
b. Who might be opposed to a system of merit p
--- PAGE 429 ---

--- PAGE 430 ---
he great British Prime Minister Winston Churchill once summarized alter-
native economic systems as follows: “The inherent vice of capitalism is the 
unequal sharing of blessings. The inherent virtue of socialism is the equal 
sharing of miseries.” Churchill’s quip draws attention to two important facts. 
First, nations that use market mechanisms to allocate resources usually achieve 
greater prosperity than those that do not. This is the result of Adam Smith’s invis-
ible hand in action. Second, the prosperity that market economies produce is not 
shared equally. Incomes can differ greatly between those at the top and those at 
the bottom of the economic ladder. The gap between rich and poor is a fasci-
nating and important topic of study—for the comfortable rich, for 
the struggling poor, and for the aspiring and worried 
--- PAGE 431 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
From the previous two chapters, you should have some understanding about 
why different people have different incomes. A person’s earnings depend on the 
supply and demand for that person’s labor, which in turn depend on natural abil-
ity, human capital, compensating differentials, discrimination, and so on. Because 
labor earnings make up about two-thirds of the total income in the U.S. economy, 
the factors that determine wages are also largely responsible for determining how 
the economy’s total income is distributed among the various members of society. 
In other words, they determine who is rich and who is poor. 
In this chapter, we discuss the distribution of income—a topic that raises some 
fundamental questions about the role of economic policy. One of the Ten Principles 
of Economics introduced in Chapter 1 is that governments can sometimes improve 
market outcomes. This possibility is particularly important when considering the 
distribution of income. The invisible hand of the marketplace allocates resources 
efficiently but does not necessarily allocate them fairly. As a result, many econo-
mists—though not all—believe that the government should redistribute income to 
achieve greater equality. In doing so, however, the government runs into another 
of the Ten Principles of Economics: People face trade-offs. When the governme
--- PAGE 432 ---
CHAPTER 20   INCOME INEQUALITY AND POVERTY 
The last column in the table shows the share of total income received by the 
very richest families. In 2014, the top 5 percent of families received 20.8 percent 
of all income, which was greater than the total income of the poorest 40 percent.
Table 2 also shows the distribution of income in various years beginning in 
1935. At first glance, the distribution of income appears to have been remarkably 
stable over time. Throughout the past several decades, the bottom quintile has 
received about 4 to 5 percent of income, while the top quintile has received about 
40 to 50 percent of income. Closer inspection of the table reveals some trends in 
the degree of inequality. From 1935 to 1970, the distribution gradually became 
more equal. The share of the bottom quintile rose from 4.1 to 5.4 percent, and 
the share of the top quintile fell from 51.7 to 40.9 percent. In more recent years, 
this trend has reversed itself. From 1970 to 2014, the share of the bottom quintile 
fell from 5.4 to 3.6 percent, and the share of the top quintile rose from 40.9 to 
In Chapter 19, we discussed some explanations for this recent rise in inequality. 
Increases in international trade with low-wage countries and changes in technol-
ogy have tended to reduce the demand for unskilled labor and raise the demand 
for skilled labor. As a result, the wages of uns
--- PAGE 433 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
countries, data are not available. Even when they are, not every country collects 
data in the same way; for example, some countries collect data on individual 
incomes, whereas other countries collect data on family incomes, and still oth-
ers collect data on expenditure and use it as a crude measure of income. As a 
result, whenever we find a difference between two countries, we can never be 
sure whether it reflects a true difference in the economies or merely a difference in 
the way data are collected.
With this warning in mind, consider Figure 1, which compares inequality in 
twenty major countries. The inequality measure used here is the quintile ratio, 
which is the income of the richest quintile divided by the income of the poorest 
quintile. The most equality is found in Sweden, where the top quintile receives 3.7 
times as much income as the bottom quintile. The least equality is found in South 
Africa, where the top group receives 28.5 times as much income as the bottom 
group. All countries have significant disparities between rich and poor, but the 
degree of inequality varies substantially around the world.
When countries are ranked by inequality, the United States ends up with more 
inequality than the typical country. The United States has substantially greater 
income disparity than most other economically advanced coun
--- PAGE 434 ---
CHAPTER 20   INCOME INEQUALITY AND POVERTY 
Source: New York Times, July 20, 2014.
A global perspective reveals some good 
Income Inequality Is Not Rising 
ncome inequality has surged as a political and 
economic issue, but the numbers don’t show 
that inequality is rising from a global perspec-
tive. Yes, the problem has become more acute 
within most individual nations, yet income 
 inequality for the world as a whole has been 
falling for most of the last 20 years. It’s a fact 
that hasn’t been noted often enough.
The finding comes from a recent investi-
gation by Christoph Lakner, a consultant at 
the World Bank, and Branko Milanovic, senior 
scholar at the Luxembourg Income Study Center. 
And while such a framing may sound startling 
at first, it should be intuitive upon reflection. 
The economic surges of China, India and some 
other nations have been among the most egali-
tarian developments in history.
Of course, no one should use this obser-
vation as an excuse to stop helping the less 
fortunate. But it can help us see that higher 
income inequality is not always the most rel-
evant problem, even for strict egalitarians. 
Policies on immigration and free trade, for 
 example, sometimes increase inequality within 
a nation, yet can make the world a better place 
and often decrease inequality on the planet as 
International trade has drastically reduced 
poverty within 
--- PAGE 435 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
A commonly used gauge of the distribution of income is the poverty rate. The 
poverty rate is the percentage of the population whose family income falls below 
an absolute level called the poverty line. The poverty line is set by the federal 
government at roughly three times the cost of providing an adequate diet. This 
line depends on family size and is adjusted every year to account for changes in 
To get some idea about what the poverty rate tells us, consider the data for 2014. 
In that year, the median family in the United States had an income of $66,632, and 
the poverty line for a family of four was $24,230. The poverty rate was 14.8 per-
cent. In other words, 14.8 percent of the U.S. population were members of families 
with incomes below the poverty line for their family size. 
Figure 2 shows the poverty rate since 1959, when the official data begin. You 
can see that the poverty rate fell from 22.4 percent in 1959 to a low of 11.1  percent 
in 1973. This decline is not surprising, as average income in the economy  (adjusted 
for inflation) rose more than 50 percent during this period. Because the pov-
erty line is an absolute rather than a relative standard, more families are pushed 
above the poverty line as economic growth pushes the entire income distribution 
Since the early 1970s, however, the economy’s rising tide has le
--- PAGE 436 ---
CHAPTER 20   INCOME INEQUALITY AND POVERTY 
• Poverty is correlated with age. Children are more likely than average to be 
members of poor families, and the elderly are less likely than average to be 
• Poverty is correlated with family composition. Families headed by a single 
mother are about five times as likely to live in poverty as families headed by 
These three facts have described American society for many years, and they show 
which people are most likely to be poor. These effects also work together: Almost 
half the children in black and Hispanic female-headed households live in poverty.
20-1d Problems in Measuring Inequality
Although data on the income distribution and the poverty rate give us some 
idea about the degree of inequality in our society, interpreting these data is not 
always straightforward. The data are based on households’ annual incomes. 
What people care about, however, is not their incomes but their ability to main-
tain a good standard of living. For at least three reasons, data on the income dis-
tribution and the poverty rate give an incomplete picture of inequality in living 
In-Kind Transfers   Measurements of the distribution of income and the poverty 
rate are based on families’ monetary income. Through various government pro-
grams, however, the poor receive many nonmonetary items, including free food, 
housing vouchers, and medical service
--- PAGE 437 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
Because people can borrow and save to smooth out life cycle changes in 
 income, their standard of living in any year depends more on lifetime income 
than on that year’s income. The young often borrow, perhaps to go to school or 
to buy a house, and then repay these loans later when their incomes rise. People 
have their highest saving rates when they are middle-aged. Because people can 
save in anticipation of retirement, the large declines in incomes at retirement need 
not lead to similar declines in the standard of living. This normal life cycle pattern 
causes inequality in the distribution of annual income, but it does not necessarily 
represent true inequality in living standards. 
Transitory versus Permanent Income  Incomes vary over people’s lives not only 
because of predictable life cycle variation but also because of random and transi-
tory forces. One year a frost kills off the Florida orange crop, and Florida orange 
growers see their incomes fall temporarily. At the same time, the Florida frost 
drives up the price of oranges, and California orange growers see their incomes 
temporarily rise. The next year the reverse might happen.
Just as people can borrow and save to smooth out life cycle variation in income, 
they can also borrow and save to smooth out transitory variation in income. To the 
extent that a family saves 
--- PAGE 438 ---
CHAPTER 20   INCOME INEQUALITY AND POVERTY 
two earners, they are more likely to find themselves near the top of the income 
distribution. But they also have more mouths to feed. Cox and Alm reported that 
households in the top fifth had an average of 3.1 people, while those in the bottom 
fifth had an average of 1.7 people. As a result, consumption per person in the rich-
est fifth of households was only 2.1 times consumption per person in the poorest 
These data show that inequality in material standards of living is much smaller 
than inequality in annual income. ●
People sometimes speak of “the rich” and “the poor” as if these groups con-
sisted of the same families year after year. But this is not at all the case. Economic 
 mobility, the movement of people between income classes, is significant in the 
U.S. economy. Movements up the income ladder can be due to good luck or hard 
work, and movements down the ladder can be due to bad luck or laziness. Some 
of this mobility reflects transitory variation in income, while some reflects more 
persistent changes in income.
Because family income changes over time, temporary poverty is more common 
than the poverty rate suggests, but persistent poverty is less common. In a typical 
10-year period, about one in four families falls below the poverty line in at least one 
year. Yet fewer than 3 percent of families are poor for 8 or 
--- PAGE 439 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
because the government’s role in redistributing income is central to so many 
 debates over economic policy, let’s digress from economic science to consider a bit 
A prominent school of thought in political philosophy is utilitarianism. The 
founders of utilitarianism are the English philosophers Jeremy Bentham (1748–
1832) and John Stuart Mill (1806–1873). To a large extent, the goal of utilitarians is 
to apply the logic of individual decision making to questions concerning morality 
The starting point of utilitarianism is the notion of utility—the level of hap-
piness or satisfaction that a person receives from his circumstances. Utility is a 
measure of well-being and, according to utilitarians, is the ultimate objective of 
all public and private actions. The proper goal of the government, they claim, is to 
maximize the sum of utility achieved by everyone in society. 
The utilitarian case for redistributing income is based on the assumption of 
diminishing marginal utility. It seems reasonable that an extra dollar of  income 
provides a poor person with more additional utility than an extra dollar 
would provide to a rich person. In other words, as a person’s income rises, the 
extra well-being derived from an additional dollar of income falls. This plausible 
 assumption, together with the utilitarian goal of maximizing total util
--- PAGE 440 ---
CHAPTER 20   INCOME INEQUALITY AND POVERTY 
the water is lost in transit. In this case, a utilitarian government might still try to 
move some water from Peter to Paul, depending on the size of Paul’s thirst and 
the size of the bucket’s leak. But with only a leaky bucket at its disposal, a utilitar-
ian government will stop short of trying to reach complete equality.
A second way of thinking about inequality might be called liberalism. Philoso-
pher John Rawls develops this view in his book A Theory of Justice. This book was 
first published in 1971, and it quickly became a classic in political philosophy. 
Rawls begins with the premise that a society’s institutions, laws, and policies 
should be just. He then takes up the natural question: How can we, the members 
of society, ever agree on what justice means? It might seem that every person’s 
point of view is inevitably based on his particular circumstances—whether he 
is talented or less talented, diligent or lazy, educated or less educated, born to 
a wealthy family or a poor one. Could we ever objectively determine what a just 
To answer this question, Rawls proposes the following thought experiment. 
Imagine that before any of us is born, we all get together in the beforelife (the 
pre-birth version of the afterlife) for a meeting to design the rules that will govern 
society. At this point, we are all ignorant about the
--- PAGE 441 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
perspective of the original position behind the veil of ignorance, income redis-
tribution is like an insurance policy. Homeowners buy fire insurance to protect 
themselves from the risk of their house burning down. Similarly, when we as a 
society choose policies that tax the rich to supplement the incomes of the poor, we 
are all insuring ourselves against the possibility that we might have been mem-
bers of poor families. Because people generally dislike risk, we should be happy 
to have been born into a society that provides us this insurance. 
It is not at all clear, however, that rational people behind the veil of igno-
rance would truly be so risk averse that they would follow the maximin crite-
rion.  Indeed, because a person in the original position might end up anywhere in 
the distribution of outcomes, he might treat all possible outcomes equally when 
designing public policies. In this case, the best policy behind the veil of ignorance 
would be to maximize the average utility of members of society, and the resulting 
notion of justice would be more utilitarian than Rawlsian.
A third view of inequality is called libertarianism. The two views we have consid-
ered so far—utilitarianism and liberalism—both view the total income of society 
as a shared resource that a social planner can freely redistribute to achieve some 
social
--- PAGE 442 ---
CHAPTER 20   INCOME INEQUALITY AND POVERTY 
rights to ensure that everyone has the same opportunity to use his talents and 
achieve success. Once these rules of the game are established, the government has 
no reason to alter the resulting distribution of income. 
Petra earns more than Paula. Someone proposes taxing Petra to supple-
ment Paula’s income. How would a utilitarian, a liberal, and a libertarian 
each evaluate this proposal?
20-3 Policies to Reduce Poverty
As we have just seen, political philosophers hold various views about what role 
the government should take in altering the distribution of income. Political debate 
among the larger population of voters reflects a similar disagreement. Despite these 
continuing debates, most people believe that, at the very least, the government 
should try to help those most in need. According to a popular metaphor, the govern-
ment should provide a “safety net” to prevent any citizen from falling too far. 
Poverty is one of the most difficult problems that policymakers face. Poor fam-
ilies are more likely than the overall population to experience homelessness, drug 
dependence, health problems, teenage pregnancy, illiteracy, unemployment, and 
low educational attainment. Members of poor families are more likely both to 
commit crimes and to be victims of crimes. Although it is hard to separate the 
causes of poverty from the ef
--- PAGE 443 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
One way for the government to raise the living standards of the poor is to supplement 
their incomes. The primary way the government does this is through the welfare 
system. Welfare is a broad term that encompasses various government programs. 
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) is a program that assists families 
with children and no adult able to support the family. In a typical family receiving 
such assistance, the father is absent and the mother is at home raising small children. 
Another welfare program is Supplemental Security Income (SSI), which provides as-
sistance to the poor who are sick or disabled. Note that for both of these welfare pro-
grams, a poor person cannot qualify for assistance simply by having a low income. 
He must also establish some additional “need,” such as small children or a disability. 
A common criticism of welfare programs is that they create incentives for peo-
ple to become “needy.” For example, these programs may encourage families to 
break up, for many families qualify for financial assistance only if the father is 
absent. The programs may also encourage illegitimate births, for many poor, sin-
gle women qualify for assistance only if they have children. Because poor, single 
mothers are such a large part of the poverty problem and because welfare pro-
grams seem to raise the number 
--- PAGE 444 ---
CHAPTER 20   INCOME INEQUALITY AND POVERTY 
assistance would be a low income. Depending on one’s point of view, this feature 
can be either an advantage or a disadvantage. On the one hand, a negative income 
tax does not encourage illegitimate births and the breakup of families, as critics 
of the welfare system believe current policy does. On the other hand, a negative 
 income tax would subsidize not only the unfortunate but also those who are sim-
ply lazy and, in some people’s eyes, undeserving of government support. 
One actual tax provision that works much like a negative income tax is the Earned 
Income Tax Credit (EITC). This credit allows poor working families to receive 
income tax refunds greater than the taxes they paid during the year. Because the 
EITC applies only to the working poor, it does not discourage recipients from work-
ing, as other antipoverty programs may. For the same reason, however, it also does 
not help alleviate poverty due to unemployment, sickness, or other inability to work. 
Another way to help the poor is to provide them directly with some of the goods 
and services they need to raise their living standards. For example, charities 
provide the needy with food, clothing, shelter, and toys at Christmas. The gov-
ernment gives poor families food through the Supplemental Nutrition Assis-
tance Program, or SNAP. This program, which replaced a si
--- PAGE 445 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
Many nations have more generous 
social safety nets than the United 
States, but they also have very different 
arely have we experienced such a con-
fluence of arguments in favor of raising 
taxes on the rich. After a hard-won re- election 
fought mainly over taxes and spending, 
 President Obama arguably has a mandate 
from voters to tap the wealthy to address our 
[Author’s note: Shortly after this article 
was written, President Obama did indeed sign 
into law an increase in taxes on high incomes. 
These higher tax rates went into effect in 
Yet while raising more taxes from the win-
ners in the globalized economy is a start, and 
may help us dig out of our immediate fiscal 
hole, it is unlikely to be enough to address 
our long-term needs. The experience of many 
other developed countries suggests that pay-
ing for a government that could help the poor 
and the middle class cope in our brave new 
globalized world will require more money from 
Many Americans may find this hard to 
believe, but the United States already has one 
of the most progressive tax systems in the 
developed world, according to several stud-
ies, raising proportionately more revenue from 
the wealthy than other advanced countries 
do. Taxes on American households do more to 
redistribute resources and reduce inequality 
than the tax codes of most other rich nat
--- PAGE 446 ---
CHAPTER 20   INCOME INEQUALITY AND POVERTY 
Source: New York Times, November 28, 2012.
The same pattern can be found across a 
range of government programs. The reason is 
always the same: their relatively small size. 
Over all, government cash benefits in the 
United States—including pensions, disability, 
unemployment insurance and the like—con-
tribute about 10 percent to household income, 
on average, according to the study. The aver-
age across industrial nations is twice that. 
Our budget reveals a core philosophical 
difference with other advanced countries. 
In the big-government social democracies 
like those of Western Europe, government is 
expected to guarantee a set of universal pub-
lic services—from health care to child care to 
pensions—that are considered basic rights 
of citizenry. To pay for this minimum welfare 
package, everybody is expected to contribute 
proportionately into the pot. 
Government in the United States has a 
different goal. Benefits are narrower. Social 
Security and Medicare follow a universal service 
template, but only for older Americans. Other 
social spending is aimed carefully to benefit the 
poor. Financed through a more progressive tax 
code, it looks more like charity than a universal 
right. On top of that, our philosophical stance 
virtually ensures a small government. 
Progressive taxes make it hard to raise 
money because they
--- PAGE 447 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
the poor with high effective marginal tax rates and burdening taxpayers with 
costly programs to reduce poverty.
There are various other ways to reduce the work disincentive of antipoverty 
programs. One is to require any person collecting benefits to accept a govern-
ment-provided job—a system sometimes called workfare. Another possibility is to 
provide benefits for only a limited period of time. This route was taken in the 1996 
welfare reform bill, which imposed a 5-year lifetime limit on welfare recipients. 
When President Clinton signed the bill, he explained his policy as follows: “Wel-
fare should be a second chance, not a way of life.”
List three policies aimed at helping the poor, and discuss the pros and 
People have long reflected on the distribution of income in society. Plato, the 
 ancient Greek philosopher, concluded that in an ideal society the income of the 
richest person would be no more than four times the income of the poorest per-
son. Although the measurement of inequality is difficult, it is clear that our society 
has much more inequality than Plato recommended.
One of the Ten Principles of Economics discussed in Chapter 1 is that govern-
ments can sometimes improve market outcomes. There is little consensus, how-
ever, about how this principle should be applied to the distribution of income. 
Philosophers and p
--- PAGE 448 ---
CHAPTER 20   INCOME INEQUALITY AND POVERTY 
• Data on the distribution of income show a wide dispar-
ity in U.S. society. The richest fifth of families earns more 
than twelve times as much income as the poorest fifth.
• Because in-kind transfers, the economic life cycle, transi-
tory income, and economic mobility are so important for 
understanding variation in income, it is difficult to gauge 
the degree of inequality in our society using data on the 
distribution of income in a single year. When these other 
factors are taken into account, they tend to suggest that 
economic well-being is more equally distributed than is 
• Political philosophers differ in their views about the role 
of government in altering the distribution of income. 
Utilitarians (such as John Stuart Mill) would choose 
the distribution of income that maximizes the sum of 
utility of everyone in society. Liberals (such as John 
Rawls) would determine the distribution of income as if 
we were behind a “veil of ignorance” that prevented us 
from knowing our stations in life. Libertarians (such as 
Robert Nozick) would have the government enforce indi-
vidual rights to ensure a fair process but then would not 
be concerned about inequality in the resulting distribu-
• Various policies aim to help the poor—minimum-wage 
laws, welfare, negative income taxes, and in-kind trans-
fers. While these policies help 
--- PAGE 449 ---
PART VI   THE ECONOMICS OF LABOR MARKETS
1. Does the richest fifth of the U.S. population earn closer 
to three, six, or twelve times the income of the poorest 
2. What has happened to the income share of the richest 
fifth of the U.S. population over the past 40 years?
3. What groups in the U.S. population are most likely to 
4. When gauging the amount of inequality, why do 
transitory and life cycle variations in income cause 
5. How would a utilitarian, a liberal, and a libertar-
ian each determine how much income inequality is 
6. What are the pros and cons of in-kind (rather than 
cash) transfers to the poor?
7. Describe how antipoverty programs can discourage 
the poor from working. How might you reduce this 
disincentive? What are the disadvantages of your 
1. Table 2 shows that income inequality in the United 
States has increased since 1970. Some factors contrib-
uting to this increase were discussed in Chapter 19. 
2. Table 3 shows that the percentage of children in fam-
ilies with income below the poverty line far exceeds 
the percentage of the elderly in such families. How 
might the allocation of government money across 
different social programs have contributed to this 
3. This chapter discusses the importance of economic 
a. What policies might the government pursue to 
 increase economic mobility within a generation?
b. What policies might the government pursue
--- PAGE 450 ---
CHAPTER 20   INCOME INEQUALITY AND POVERTY 
6. Suppose there are two possible income distributions 
in a society of ten people. In the first distribution, nine 
people have incomes of $30,000 and one person has an 
income of $10,000. In the second distribution, all ten 
people have incomes of $25,000.
a. If the society had the first income distribution, 
what would be the utilitarian argument for redis-
b. Which income distribution would Rawls consider 
c. Which income distribution would Nozick 
 consider more equitable? Explain.
7. The poverty rate would be substantially lower if the 
market value of in-kind transfers were added to fam-
ily income. The largest in-kind transfer is Medicaid, 
the government health program for the poor. Let’s say 
the program costs $10,000 per recipient family.
a. If the government gave each recipient family a 
$10,000 check instead of enrolling them in the 
Medicaid program, do you think that most of 
these families would spend that money to pur-
chase health insurance? Why? (Recall that the 
poverty level for a family of four is about $23,000.)
b. How does your answer to part (a) affect your view 
about whether we should determine the poverty 
rate by valuing in-kind transfers at the price the 
government pays for them? Explain.
c. How does your answer to part (a) affect your 
view about whether we should provide assistance 
to the poor in the 
--- PAGE 451 ---

--- PAGE 452 ---

